

=== PAGE 1 ===
 Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel (P5) May 2014
Building for Discovery
Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context

=== PAGE 2 ===


=== PAGE 3 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel i
 Preface
Panel reports usually convey their results logically and dispas-
sionately, with no mention of the emotional, soul-searching 
processes behind them. We would like to break with tradition 
to share some behind-the-scenes aspects and perspectives.
This is a challenging time for particle physics. The science is 
deeply exciting and its endeavors have been extremely suc -
cessful, yet funding in the U.S. is declining in real terms. This 
report offers important opportunities for U.S. investment in 
science, prioritized under the tightly constrained budget sce-
narios in the Charge. We had the responsibility to make the 
tough choices for a world-class program under each of these 
scenarios, which we have done. At the same time, we felt the 
responsibility to aspire to an even bolder future. These are not 
contradictory responsibilities: an annual budget is a balance 
sheet, but investment in fundamental research is a powerful 
expression that our culture and economy have greater potential 
in the long run. Our society’s capacity to grow is limited only 
by our collective imagination and resolve to make long-term 
investments that can lead to fundamental, game-changing 
discoveries, even in the context of constrained budgets.
We were given complex issues to resolve. We listened carefully 
to our community, to those who charged us, and to scientists 
in other fields. Our community’s passion, dedication, and entre-
preneurial spirit have been inspirational. Therefore, to our 
colleagues across our country and around the world, we say a 
heartfelt thank you. Every request we made received a thought-
ful response, even when the requests were substantial and the 
schedules tight. A large number of you submitted inputs to 
the public portal, which we very much appreciated.
In our deliberations, no topic or option was off the table. Every 
alternative we could imagine was considered. We worked by 
consensus—even when just one or two individuals voiced con-
cerns, we worked through the issues.
Wondrous projects that address profound questions inspire 
and invigorate far beyond their specific fields, and they lay 
the foundations for next-century technologies we can only 
begin to imagine. Particle physics is an excellent candidate 
for such investments. Historic opportunities await us, enabled 
by decades of hard work and support. Our field is ready to 
move forward.
Respectfully submitted,
Steve Ritz, chair
University of California, 
Santa Cruz
Hiroaki Aihara
University of Tokyo
Martin Breidenbach
SLAC National Accelerator 
Laboratory
Bob Cousins
University of California,  
Los Angeles
André de Gouvêa
Northwestern University
Marcel Demarteau
Argonne National Laboratory
Scott Dodelson
Fermi National Accelerator 
Laboratory and  
University of Chicago
Jonathan L. Feng
University of California, 
Irvine
Bonnie Fleming
Yale University
Fabiola Gianotti
European Organization for 
Nuclear Research (CERN)
Francis Halzen
University of 
Wisconsin-Madison
JoAnne Hewett
SLAC National Accelerator 
Laboratory
Wim Leemans
Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory
Joe Lykken
Fermi National Accelerator 
Laboratory
Dan McKinsey
Yale University
Lia Merminga
TRIUMF
Toshinori Mori
University of Tokyo
Tatsuya Nakada
Swiss Federal Institute  
of Technology  
in Lausanne (EPFL)
Steve Peggs
Brookhaven National 
Laboratory
Saul Perlmutter
University of California, 
Berkeley
Kevin Pitts
University of Illinois  
at Urbana-Champaign
Kate Scholberg
Duke University
Rick van Kooten
Indiana University
Mark Wise
California Institute of 
Technology
Andy Lankford, ex officio
University of California, 
Irvine


=== PAGE 4 ===


=== PAGE 5 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel iii
Contents
Executive Summary v
Chapter 1: Introduction 1
1.1: Particle Physics is a Global Field for Discovery — 2
1.2: Brief Summary of the Science Drivers and Main Opportunities — 3
1.3: Criteria — 6
Chapter 2: Recommendations 7
2.1: Program-wide Recommendations — 8
2.2: Project-specific Recommendations — 10
2.3: Funding Scenarios — 15
2.4: Enabling R&D — 19
Chapter 3: The Science Drivers  23
3.1: Use the Higgs Boson as a New Tool for Discovery — 25
3.2: Pursue the Physics Associated with Neutrino Mass — 29
3.3: Identify the New Physics of Dark Matter — 35
3.4: Understand Cosmic Acceleration: Dark Energy and Inflation — 39
3.5: Explore the Unknown: New Particles, Interactions, and Physical Principles — 43
3.6: Enabling R&D and Computing — 46
Chapter 4: Benefits and Broader Impacts 49
Appendices 53
Appendix A: Charge — 54
Appendix B: Panel Members — 57
Appendix C: Process and Meetings — 58
Appendix D: Snowmass Questions — 63
Appendix E: Full List of Recommendations — 64

=== PAGE 6 ===


=== PAGE 7 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel v
Particle physics explores the fundamental constituents of mat-
ter and energy. It reveals the profound connections underlying 
everything we see, including the smallest and the largest struc-
tures in the Universe. The field is highly successful. Investments 
have been rewarded recently with discoveries of the heaviest 
elementary particle (the top quark), the tiny masses of neutri-
nos, the accelerated expansion of the Universe, and the Higgs 
boson. Current opportunities will exploit these and other dis-
coveries to push the frontiers of science into new territory at 
the highest energies and earliest times imaginable. For all these 
reasons, research in particle physics inspires young people to 
engage with science. 
Particle physics is global. The United States and major players 
in other regions can together address the full breadth of the 
field’s most urgent scientific questions if each hosts a unique 
world-class facility at home and partners in high-priority facil-
ities hosted elsewhere. Strong foundations of international 
cooperation exist, with the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at 
CERN serving as an example of a successful large international 
science project. Reliable partnerships are essential for the suc-
cess of international projects. Building further international 
cooperation is an important theme of this report, and this 
perspective is finding worldwide resonance in an intensely 
competitive field.
Choices are required. Ideas for excellent new projects far exceed 
what can be executed with currently available resources. The 
U.S. must invest purposefully in areas that have the biggest 
impacts and that make most efficient use of limited resources. 
Since the 2008 Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 
(P5) report, two major U.S. particle physics facilities have ter-
minated operations, and inflation-adjusted funding in the U.S. 
for particle physics has continued to decline. In addition, pri-
marily because of earlier strong investments, landmark dis -
coveries have been made that inform choices for future direc-
tions. A new P5  panel was therefore charged to provide “an 
updated strategic plan for the U.S. that can be executed over 
a ten-year timescale, in the context of a twenty-year global 
vision for the field.” The Charge calls for planning under two 
specific budget Scenarios, reflecting current fiscal realities, as 
well as for an additional unconstrained Scenario. 
Snowmass, the yearlong community-wide study, preceded the 
formation of our new P5. A vast number of scientific opportu-
nities were investigated, discussed, and summarized in 
Snowmass reports. We distilled those essential inputs into five 
intertwined science Drivers for the field:
• Use the Higgs boson as a new tool for discovery
• Pursue the physics associated with neutrino mass 
• Identify the new physics of dark matter
• Understand cosmic acceleration: dark energy and inflation
•  Explore the unknown: new particles, interactions,  
and physical principles.
The vision for addressing these Drivers with a prioritized set 
of projects, including their approximate timescales and how 
they fit together, was developed using a set of selection criteria. 
The Drivers, which are intertwined, are not prioritized. Instead, 
the prioritization is in the selection and timing of the specific 
projects, which are categorized as large, medium, or small based 
on the construction costs to the particle physics program.
To enable an optimal program, given recent scientific results 
and funding constraints, and using our criteria, we recommend 
some projects not be implemented, others be delayed, and 
some existing efforts be reduced or terminated. Having made 
these choices, the field can move forward immediately with a 
prioritized, time-ordered program, which is summarized in Table 1 
and includes the following features:
• The enormous physics potential of the LHC, which will be 
entering a new era with its planned high-luminosity upgrades, 
will be fully exploited. The U.S. will host a world-leading neutrino 
program that will have an optimized set of short- and long-base-
line neutrino oscillation experiments, and its long-term focus 
is a reformulated venture referred to here as the Long Baseline 
Neutrino Facility (LBNF). The Proton Improvement Plan-II (PIP-II) 
project at Fermilab will provide the needed neutrino physics 
capability. To meet budget constraints, physics needs, and read-
iness criteria, large projects are ordered by peak construction 
time: the Mu2e experiment, the high-luminosity LHC upgrades, 
and LBNF.
 Executive Summary

=== PAGE 8 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context vi
• The interest expressed in Japan in hosting the International 
Linear Collider (ILC) is an exciting development. Participation 
by the U.S. in project construction depends on a number of 
important factors, some of which are beyond the scope of P5 
and some of which depend on budget Scenarios. As the physics 
case is extremely strong, all Scenarios include ILC support at 
some level through a decision point within the next 5  years.
• Several medium and small projects in areas especially prom-
ising for near-term discoveries and in which the U.S. is, or can 
be, in a leadership position, will move forward under all budget 
scenarios. These are the second- and third-generation dark 
matter direct detection experiments, the particle physics com-
ponents of the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) and 
cosmic microwave background (CMB) experiments, and a port-
folio of small neutrino experiments. Another important project 
of this type, the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI), 
will also move forward, except in the lowest budget Scenario.
• With a mix of large, medium, and small projects, important 
physics results will be produced continuously throughout the 
twenty-year P5 timeframe. In our budget exercises, we main-
tained a small projects portfolio to preserve budgetary space 
for a set of projects whose costs individually are not large 
enough to come under direct P5 review but which are of great 
importance to the field. This is in addition to the aforemen-
tioned small neutrino experiments portfolio, which is intended 
to be integrated into a coherent overall neutrino program. 
• Specific investments will be made in essential accelerator 
R&D and instrumentation R&D. The field relies on its acceler -
ators and instrumentation and on R&D and test facilities for 
these technologies.
Several significant changes in direction are recommended:
• Increase the fraction of the budget devoted to construction 
of new facilities.
• Reformulate the long-baseline neutrino program as an inter-
nationally designed, coordinated, and funded program with 
Fermilab as host. 
• Redirect former Project-X activities and some existing acceler-
ator R&D to improvements of the Fermilab accelerator complex 
that will provide proton beams with power greater than one 
megawatt by the time of first operation of the new long-base-
line neutrino facility.
• Increase the planned investment in second-generation dark 
matter direct detection experiments.
• Increase particle physics funding of CMB research and proj-
ects in the context of continued multiagency partnerships. 
• Realign activities in accelerator R&D with the P5  strategic 
plan. Redirect muon collider R&D and consult with international 
partners on the early termination of the MICE muon cooling 
R&D facility. 
The two constrained budget Scenarios differ by approximately 
$30M per year until FY2018, and thereafter have a one percent 
escalation difference. While seemingly small, these differences 
would have very large short- and long-term impacts: in the 
lower funding Scenario, in addition to the aforementioned loss 
of DESI, accelerator R&D and advanced detector R&D would 
be substantially reduced; research capability would be com-
promised due to personnel reductions; ramp up of funding for 
the long-baseline neutrino program would be delayed (prelim-
inary work would still proceed immediately in both scenarios); 
third-generation direct detection dark matter capabilities would 
be reduced or delayed; and a small reprofiling of Mu2e would 
be necessary. Thus, the relatively small increment in funding in 
the higher Scenario yields a very large return on investment.
The lowest budget Scenario is precarious: it approaches the 
point beyond which hosting a large ($1B scale) project in the 
U.S. would not be possible while maintaining the other elements 
necessary for mission success, particularly a minimal research 
program, the strong U.S. leadership position in a small number 
of core, near-term projects, which produce a steady stream of 
important new physics results, and advances in accelerator 
technology. Without the capability to host a large project, the 
U.S. would lose its position as a global leader in this field, and 
the international relationships that have been so productive 
would be fundamentally altered.

=== PAGE 9 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel vii
The recommendations for the unconstrained budget Scenario 
focus on three additional high-priority activities: 
• Develop a greatly expanded accelerator R&D program that 
would emphasize the ability to build very high-energy accel-
erators beyond the High-Luminosity LHC (HL-LHC) and ILC at 
dramatically lower cost. 
• Play a world-leading role in the ILC experimental program 
and provide critical expertise and components to the accelerator, 
should this exciting scientific opportunity be realized in Japan.
• Host a large water Cherenkov neutrino detector to comple-
ment the LBNF large liquid argon detector, unifying the global 
long-baseline neutrino community to take full advantage of 
the world’s highest intensity neutrino beam at Fermilab. 
With foundations set by decades of hard work and support, 
U.S. particle physics is poised to move forward into a new era 
of discovery. More generally, we strongly affirm the essential 
importance of fundamental research in all areas of science. 

=== PAGE 10 ===


=== PAGE 11 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 1
1Introduction

=== PAGE 12 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 2
1.1: Particle Physics is a Global Field  
for Discovery
This is a pivotal time for particle physics, the science of discovery 
and exploration of the fundamental constituents of matter and 
energy. Since the previous P5 report in 2008, there have been 
several landmark events in the field. The Higgs boson was dis-
covered at a relatively low mass, pointing the way to the next 
steps and informing choices for long-term planning. Three Nobel 
Prizes related to particle physics (Quark Mixing and Symmetries, 
Dark Energy, Higgs Boson) were awarded. A key neutrino mixing 
parameter was measured to be relatively large, enabling the 
next steps in a campaign to understand the implications of the 
tiny, but non-zero, neutrino masses. These successes demon-
strate the deep value of diversity of topic and project scale. 
New technology and innovative approaches are creating fresh 
opportunities that promise an even brighter future.
Particle physics is global. Nations pursue particle physics 
because the questions are profound and provocative, and the 
techniques are beautiful and useful. The countries that lead 
these activities attract top minds and talent from around the 
world, inspire the next generation of scientists and technolo-
gists, and host international teams dedicated to a common 
purpose. The scientific program required to address all of the 
most compelling questions of the field is beyond the finances 
and the technical expertise of any one nation or region; none-
theless, the capability to address these questions in a compre-
hensive manner is within reach of a cooperative global program. 
The field is at a juncture where the major players each plan to 
host one of the large projects most needed by the worldwide 
scientific community.
Hosting world-class facilities and joining partnerships in facil-
ities hosted elsewhere are both essential components of a 
global vision. Europe’s future program, articulated in the 2013 
European Strategy for Particle Physics report, focuses at CERN 
on the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) program and envisions 
substantial participation at facilities in other regions. Japan, 
following its 2012 Report of the Subcommittee on Future Projects 
of High Energy Physics, expresses interest in hosting the 
International Linear Collider (ILC), pursuing the Hyper-
Kamiokande experiment, and collaborating on several other  
domestic and international projects. The United States is in 
an excellent position to host a world-class neutrino program, 
while playing key roles in the LHC and the ILC, if the ILC pro-
ceeds in Japan. Strong foundations of international cooperation 
exist, with the LHC serving as an example of how to execute 
large international science projects successfully. Reliable part-
nerships are essential for the success of international projects. 
Building further international cooperation is an important 
theme of this report. 
Inflation-adjusted funding for particle physics in the U.S. has 
continued to decline. In addition, since the previous P5 report, 
the Deep Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory 
(DUSEL) did not proceed, although the Sanford Underground 
Research Facility (SURF) laboratory continues to develop; the 
Joint Dark Energy Mission (JDEM) did not proceed; Tevatron 
collider operations ended; and PEP-II/B-factory operations 
ended. During the same period, however, U.S. involvement in 
international projects continued to be extremely productive, 
enabling many of the big discoveries now driving the field.
A new P5 was therefore charged to provide “an updated stra-
tegic plan for the U.S. that can be executed over a ten-year 
timescale, in the context of a twenty-year global vision for 
the field.” The Charge, given in Appendix A, calls for planning 
under specific budget scenarios, reflecting current fiscal real-
ities and requiring foundational choices. The U.S. must invest 
purposefully in areas that have the biggest impacts and make 
the most efficient use of limited resources. This report is 
intended as a roadmap for investment. Having made these 
choices, the field can move forward immediately with a pri-
oritized, time-ordered program.
To develop the strategic plan, we start with the science now 
driving the field. Snowmass, the yearlong, community-wide 
study preceding P5, was invaluable. It identified a broad range 
of opportunities, with the understanding that careful choices 
from a long list of compelling options are now required. The 
P5 process is summarized in Appendix C. Starting with 
Snowmass, and continuing throughout the P5  process, the 
community was actively engaged in a variety of venues, includ-
ing three large meetings, multiple town halls, and the P5 sub-
mission portal.

=== PAGE 13 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 3
Science Questions and Science Drivers
The eleven groups of physics questions from Snowmass are 
shown in Appendix D, along with a reference to all the 
Snowmass documents. Based on this comprehensive work by 
the broad community, we have identified five compelling lines 
of inquiry that show great promise for discovery over the next 
10 to 20 years. These are the science Drivers:
• Use the Higgs boson as a new tool for discovery
• Pursue the physics associated with neutrino mass 
• Identify the new physics of dark matter
• Understand cosmic acceleration: dark energy and inflation
•  Explore the unknown: new particles, interactions,  
and physical principles
The Drivers are deliberately not prioritized because they are 
intertwined, probably more deeply than is currently understood. 
For example, some of the new physics models designed to 
address theoretical limitations of the Standard Model1 also pre-
dict particles that could compose the dark matter; furthermore, 
the Higgs boson and neutrinos may interact with the dark matter. 
Other connections are possible, and although the specifics are 
not known, there are good reasons to suspect that these deeper 
connections exist. A selected set of different experimental 
approaches that reinforce each other is therefore required. These 
experiments sometimes address several Drivers. For example, 
collider experiments address the Higgs, Dark Matter, and 
Exploration Drivers. Furthermore, cosmic surveys designed to 
address dark energy and inflation also provide unique and timely 
information about neutrino properties. The vision for addressing 
each of the Drivers using a selected set of experiments—their 
approximate timescales and how they fit together—is given in 
the following subsection and in more detail in Section 3. What 
is learned at each step will inform the next steps.
1.2: Brief Summary of the Science Drivers  
and Main Opportunities
The five science Drivers, and their associated opportunities, 
are summarized here. As individual projects can address multiple 
Drivers, recommendations about the projects are given in 
Section 2.
Use the Higgs boson as a new tool for discovery
The recently discovered Higgs boson is a form of matter never 
before observed, and it is mysterious. What principles determine 
its effects on other particles? How does it interact with neutrinos 
or with dark matter? Is there one Higgs particle or many? Is the 
new particle really fundamental, or is it composed of others? The 
Higgs boson offers a unique portal into the laws of nature, and 
it connects several areas of particle physics. Any small deviation 
in its expected properties would be a major breakthrough.
The full discovery potential of the Higgs will be unleashed by 
percent-level precision studies of the Higgs properties. The 
measurement of these properties is a top priority in the physics 
program of high-energy colliders. The Large Hadron Collider 
(LHC) will be the first laboratory to use the Higgs boson as a 
tool for discovery, initially with substantial higher energy run-
ning at 14 TeV, and then with ten times more data at the High-
Luminosity LHC (HL-LHC). The HL-LHC has a compelling and 
comprehensive program that includes essential measurements 
of the Higgs properties. An e +e– collider can provide the next 
outstanding opportunity to investigate the properties of the 
Higgs in detail. The International Linear Collider (ILC ) is the 
most mature in its design and readiness for construction. The 
ILC would greatly increase the sensitivity to the Higgs boson 
interactions with the Standard Model particles, with particles 
in the dark sector, and with other new physics. The ILC will 
reach the percent or sub-percent level in sensitivity. Longer-
term future-generation accelerators, such as a very high-energy 
hadron collider, bring prospects for even better precision mea-
surements of Higgs properties and discovery potential.
Pursue the physics associated with neutrino mass 
Propelled by surprising discoveries from a series of pioneering 
experiments, neutrino physics has progressed dramatically  
over the past two decades. A diverse research program exploit-
ing particle astrophysics, accelerator and reactor experiments 
has uncovered a new landscape in neutrino physics, with a 
promising future for continued discovery. Recent results indi-
cate that answers to some of the most significant questions 
about neutrinos lie within reach of the next generation of  
 1The Standard Model describes the elementary particles, which come in three distinct types: (i) the matter particles, quarks and leptons, (ii) the photon, gluons and 
massive W and Z , which mediate the electromagnetic, strong, and weak forces, respectively, and (iii) the Higgs boson, which gives mass to the elementary particles. 
The Standard Model provides a quantitative, quantum mechanical description of the interactions of these particles that has been remarkably successful.

=== PAGE 14 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 4
experiments. Physicists now know that neutrinos exist in three 
types and that they oscillate, i.e. , they change type as they 
move in space and time. The observed oscillations imply that 
neutrinos have masses. Many aspects of neutrino physics are 
puzzling, and the experimental picture is incomplete. Powerful 
new facilities are needed to move forward, addressing the 
questions: What is the origin of neutrino mass? How are the 
masses ordered (referred to as mass hierarchy)? What are the 
masses? Do neutrinos and antineutrinos oscillate differently? 
Are there additional neutrino types or interactions? Are neu-
trinos their own antiparticles?
The U.S. is well positioned to host a world-leading neutrino 
physics program. Its centerpiece would be a next generation 
long-baseline neutrino facility (LBNF). LBNF would combine 
a high-intensity neutrino beam and a large-volume precision 
detector sited underground a long distance away to make 
accurate measurements of the oscillated neutrino properties. 
This large detector would also search for proton decay and 
neutrinos from supernova bursts. A powerful, wideband neu-
trino beam would be realized with Fermilab’s PIP-II upgrade 
project, which provides very high intensities in the Fermilab 
accelerator complex. Short-distance oscillation experiments, 
cosmic surveys, and a variety of other small experiments will 
also make important progress in answering these questions. 
Identify the new physics of dark matter
Astrophysical observations imply that the known particles of 
the Standard Model make up only about one-sixth of the total 
matter in the Universe. The rest is dark matter (DM). Dark 
matter is presumed to consist of one or more kinds of new 
particles. The properties of these particles, which are all around 
us, are unknown. Dark matter represents a bizarre shadow world 
of fundamental particles that are both omnipresent and largely 
imperceptible. Experiments are poised to reveal the identity 
of dark matter, a discovery that would transform the field of 
particle physics, advancing the understanding of the basic 
building blocks of the Universe.
There are many well-motivated ideas for what dark matter could 
be. These include weakly interacting massive particles (WIMPs), 
axions, and new kinds of neutrinos. It is imperative to search 
for dark matter along every feasible avenue. There are four  
known experimental approaches, each providing essential clues: 
direct detection, indirect detection, observation of large-scale 
astrophysical effects, and dark matter production with particle 
colliders. Direct detection experiments are sensitive to dark 
matter interactions with ordinary particles in the laboratory 
and will follow a progression from currently proposed sec -
ond-generation (DM G2) experiments to much larger third-gen-
eration (DM G3) experiments. Indirect detection experiments, 
such as the Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA ) gamma-ray 
observatory, can spot the particle debris from interactions of 
relic dark matter particles in space. Cosmic surveys are sensitive 
to dark matter properties through their effects on the structures 
of galaxies. Experiments now at the LHC and eventually at 
future colliders seek to make dark matter particles in the lab-
oratory for detailed studies.
Understand cosmic acceleration: dark energy and inflation
Armed with the dual tools of telescopes that peer back in time 
and high-energy accelerators that study elementary particles, 
scientists have pieced together a story of the origin and evo-
lution of the Universe. An important part of this story is the 
existence of two periods during which the expansion of the 
Universe accelerated. A primordial epoch of acceleration, called 
inflation, occurred during the first fraction of a second of exis-
tence. The cause of this inflation is unknown but may have 
involved fundamentally new physics at ultra-high energies. A 
second distinct epoch of accelerated expansion began more 
recently and continues today. This expansion is presumed to 
be driven by some kind of dark energy, which could be related 
to Einstein’s cosmological constant, or driven by a different 
type of dark energy that evolves with time. 
Resolving these mysteries requires better measurements of 
how rapidly the Universe was expanding during the past ten 
billion years. The Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI) 
can do this precisely enough to determine the properties of 
dark energy to the percent level over the course of billions of 
years. The matter in the Universe is gathered into patterns 
whose structure on large scales also carries information about 
the properties of dark energy. The Large Synoptic Survey 
Telescope (LSST ), measuring the positions, shapes, and dis -
tances of billions of galaxies, will perform many separate tests 
of the properties of dark energy using the large-scale structure. 

=== PAGE 15 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 5
Together, DESI and LSST can also probe the possibility that, 
instead of dark energy, new laws of space and time beyond 
those introduced by Einstein are responsible for the recent 
cosmic acceleration.
Understanding inflation is possible by measuring the charac -
teristics of two sets of primordial ripples: those that grew into 
the galaxies observed today and gravitational waves, undula-
tions in space and time that may have been observed just 
months ago by the BICEP2  telescope looking at the cosmic 
microwave background (CMB). Current CMB probes will lead 
to a Stage 4 Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB-S4) exper-
iment, with the potential for important insights into the ultra-
high energy physics that drove inflation. 
Explore the unknown: new particles, interactions, and 
physical principles
There are clear indicators of new phenomena awaiting discovery 
beyond those motivating the other four Drivers. Particle physics 
is a discovery science defined by the search for new particles 
and new interactions, and by tests of physical principles. The 
tools for this search are varied and include very high-energy 
beams of protons and electrons, intense beams of protons, 
and cosmic sources of ultra high-energy particles. The searches 
take two basic forms: producing new particles and detecting 
the quantum influence of new particles.
 
Producing new particles: The path for discovery of new particles 
by producing them in the laboratory is through high-energy 
colliders like the LHC. Well-motivated extensions of the 
Standard Model, such as Low-energy Supersymmetry, predict 
that a number of such particles should be within reach of LHC. 
HL-LHC will extend the reach for new particles that could be 
missed by LHC, either because they are very heavy or because 
they are very difficult to detect. In the event that one or more 
new particles are discovered during LHC running, HL-LHC 
experiments will be essential to reveal the identities and under-
lying physics of these particles.
Detecting the quantum influence of new particles: The existence 
of new particles that are too heavy to be produced directly at 
high-energy colliders can be inferred by looking for quantum 
influences in lower energy phenomena. There are many examples 
of such experiments taking place in Europe, Japan, China,  
and the U.S. The global program includes projects that are 
complementary to one another using different kinds of particles 
as probes that are sensitive to different types of new particles 
and interactions. Some notable examples involve a revolution-
ary increase in sensitivity for the transition of a muon to an 
electron in the presence of a nucleus Mu 2e (Fermilab) and 
COMET (J-PARC), further studies of rare processes involving 
heavy quarks or tau leptons at Belle II (KEK) and LHCb (LHC), 
and a search for proton decay using the large neutrino detectors 
of the LBNF and proposed Hyper-K experiments. 
Future Opportunities: In the longer term, very high-energy e+e– 
colliders and very high-energy proton colliders could extend 
the search for new particles and interactions, as well as enable 
precision studies of the Higgs boson and top quark properties. 
Upgrades to the accelerator complex at Fermilab (PIP-II and 
additional improvements) will offer further opportunities to 
detect the influence of new particles in rare processes.
Enabling R&D
Advances in accelerators, instrumentation, and computing 
are necessary to enable the pursuit of the Drivers. Greater 
demands are being placed on the performance in all three 
areas, at reduced cost, necessitating continued investments 
in R&D. The DOE General Accelerator R&D (GARD) program 
and Accelerator R&D Stewardship program, as well as the new 
NSF Basic Accelerator Science program, form the critical basis 
for both long- and short-term accelerator R&D, enriching par-
ticle physics and other fields. Superconducting radio-frequency 
accelerating cavities, high-field superconducting magnets to 
bend and focus beams, advanced particle acceleration tech-
niques, and other technologies are being developed for the 
required higher performance and lower cost of future accel-
erator concepts. Directed R&D programs, such as for the LHC 
Accelerator Research Program (LARP) and the Fermilab Proton 
Improvement Plan-II (PIP-II), will enable the next generation 
of accelerators. State-of-the-art test facilities at the national 
laboratories support activities on advanced accelerator R&D 
by both university and laboratory scientists. New particle 
detection techniques and instrumentation developments will 
provide the higher resolutions and higher sensitivities neces -
sary to address the ever more challenging demands of future  

=== PAGE 16 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 6
accelerator-based, underground, and cosmic particle physics 
experiments. Meanwhile, new computing and software tech-
niques for acquiring, processing, and storing large data sets will 
empower future experiments to address not only more chal-
lenging questions, but also a broader sweep of questions.
Additional important details about the science Drivers and the 
R&D necessary to address them can be found in Section 3 . 
1.3: Criteria
For the prioritization process, we developed two sets of criteria: 
one for the optimization of the program and another for the 
evaluation of individual projects.
The program optimization criteria are
• Science: based on the Drivers, assess where we want to go 
and how to get there, with a portfolio of the most promising 
approaches.
• International context: pursue the most important opportu-
nities wherever they are, and host world-leading facilities that 
attract the worldwide scientific community; duplication should 
only occur when significant value is added or when competition 
helps propel the field in important directions.
• Sustained productivity: maintain a stream of science results 
while investing in future capabilities, which implies a balance 
of project sizes; maintain and develop critical technical and 
scientific expertise and infrastructure to enable future 
discoveries.
The individual project criteria are
• Science: how the project addresses key questions in particle 
physics, the size and relevance of the discovery reach, how the 
experiment might change the direction of the field, and the 
value of null results.
• Timing: when the project is needed, and how it fits into the 
larger picture.
• Uniqueness: what the experiment adds that is unique and/or 
definitive, and where it might lead. Consider the alternatives.
• Cost vs. value: the scope should be well defined and match 
the physics case. For multi-disciplinary/agency projects, distri-
bution of support should match the distribution of science.
• History and dependencies: previous prioritization, existing 
commitments, and the impacts of changes in direction.
• Feasibility: consider the main technical, cost, and schedule 
risks of the proposed project.
• Roles: U.S. particle physics leadership, or participation, crit-
icality, as well as other benefits of the project.
Multi-disciplinary connections are of great importance to par-
ticle physics. For example, the study of the particle physics of 
dark energy and inflation is performed by historical astrophys-
ical techniques employing the detector technologies and com-
puting techniques of particle physics. The research can also 
provide information on neutrino properties. In a different 
manner, studies traditionally carried out by nuclear physics to 
determine if the neutrino is its own antiparticle inform the 
particle physics campaign to address the neutrino science 
Driver. The support from different agencies, linked by the mul-
tidisciplinary nature of the science, enables new capabilities 
of mutual benefit. For multi-disciplinary projects that receive 
particle physics funding, our criteria include a check that the 
distribution of support reflects the distribution of anticipated 
science topics and that particle physicist participation is nec -
essary for project success. Similar criteria were developed and 
used by the 2009 Particle Astrophysics Scientific Assessment 
Group (PASAG) panel.

=== PAGE 17 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 7
Recommendations 2

=== PAGE 18 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 8
Having identified the science Drivers and the decision criteria, 
we turn to the recommendations. Program-wide recommen-
dations are given first, followed by specific project recommen-
dations, a discussion of the recommended programs under 
the three budget Scenarios, and the recommendations related 
to R&D.
Table 1 lists the major projects considered by P5 and summarizes 
the program recommendations under the three budget 
Scenarios, noting which Drivers are primarily addressed by 
each project. The 2008 P5 Report defined three “Frontiers” in 
particle physics: Energy, Intensity, and Cosmic. The Frontiers 
are not lines of inquiry in the same sense as the Drivers, but 
they provide a useful categorization of experimental techniques 
and so are also indicated in Table 1.
2.1: Program-wide Recommendations
The first two recommendations align the program with the 
global vision and science Drivers discussed in the Introduction.
Recommendation 1: Pursue the most important opportuni-
ties wherever they are, and host unique, world-class facilities 
that engage the global scientific community.
Recommendation 2: Pursue a program to address the five 
science Drivers. 
The Drivers themselves are not prioritized; rather the priori-
tization is in the selection and timing of the specific projects 
to address the intertwined Drivers, optimally and appropriately 
balanced given funding and other constraints. 
Projects are categorized [large (>$200M), medium ($50 M- 
$200M), and small (<$50M)] by construction cost to the particle 
physics program. The large and medium projects are also ordered 
in time to meet the annual construction fraction guideline spec-
ified below (Recommendation 5 ). This is shown in Table 1 and 
the accompanying Figure 1, which displays the construction and 
physics activity timelines. The range of project scales enables 
an uninterrupted flow of high-priority physics results throughout 
the P5 timeframe. The projects considered by P5 are at various 
stages of maturity; consequently, the cost estimates of many 
projects are conceptual and will continue to evolve. Project pri-
ority could be affected by evolution of estimated costs. 
Recommendation 3: Develop a mechanism to reassess the 
project priority at critical decision stages if costs and/or 
capabilities change substantively.
Some of the biggest scientific questions driving the field can 
only be addressed by large and mid-scale experiments. 
However, small-scale experiments can also address many of 
the questions related to the Drivers. These experiments com-
bine timely physics with opportunities for a broad exposure 
to new experimental techniques, provide leadership roles for 
young scientists, and allow for partnerships among universities 
and national laboratories. In our budget exercises, we main-
tained a small projects portfolio to preserve budgetary space 
for a number of these important small projects, whose costs 
are typically less than $20 M. These projects individually are 
not large enough to come under direct P5 review. Small invest-
ments in large, multi-disciplinary projects, as well as early R&D 
for some project concepts, were also accounted for here.
Recommendation 4: Maintain a program of projects of all 
scales, from the largest international projects to mid- and 
small-scale projects. 
Advances in particle physics come from a combination of exper-
imental and theoretical work, as well as from R&D for advanced 
accelerator and experimental techniques. Experimental research 
requires development, construction, operation, and scientific 
exploitation of projects and facilities, often of significant scale. 
Unlike other regions in the world, in recent years the U.S. par-
ticle physics program has not invested substantially in con-
struction of experimental facilities. Addressing the Drivers in 
the coming and subsequent decades requires renewed invest-
ment in projects. In constant or near-constant budgets, this 
implies an increase in the fraction of the budget that is invested 
in new projects, which is currently approximately 16% .
Recommendation 5: Increase the budget fraction invested 
in construction of projects to the 20%–25% range.

=== PAGE 19 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 9
This represents a large commitment to building new experi-
ments, which we see as essential. Increasing the project fraction 
will necessarily entail judicious reductions in the fractions of 
the budget invested in the research program and operations. 
In addition, for the research program, which has seen reductions 
in recent years, flat-flat budgets are substantially detrimental 
over time due to escalation of real costs. To limit reductions 
in research program funding, we adopted a guideline that its 
budget fraction should be >40% in our budget planning exer-
cises. The three main budget categories are project construc -
tion, the research program, and operations.
The particle physics research program supports activities that 
give meaning to the data. These include analyzing the data 
directly, developing and refining sophisticated computer models 
to compare the data with theoretical expectations, synthesizing 
the knowledge gained from experimental discoveries and con-
straints, and looking forward by developing ideas that lead to 
new scientific opportunities.
Graduate students and postdoctoral researchers have essential 
roles in all aspects of this world-leading research. In turn, these 
young researchers obtain scientific and technical training. This 
develops the next generation of scientific leaders and provides 
to society a cadre of young people with extraordinary skills 
and experience.
The U.S. has leadership in diverse areas of theoretical research 
in particle physics. A thriving theory program is essential for 
both identifying new directions for the field and supporting 
the current experimental program. Theoretical physicists are 
needed for a variety of crucial activities that include taking 
the lead in the interpretation and synthesis of a broad range 
of experimental results, progress in quantum field theory and 
possible new frameworks for a deeper understanding of Nature, 
and developing new ideas into testable models. Theoretical 
research both defines the physics drivers of the field and finds 
the deep connections among them. As experiments have con-
fronted the Standard Model with increasing sophistication, 
theoretical research has provided extraordinary advances in 
calculation techniques, pushing the leading edge of both math-
ematics and high performance computing. 
Particle physics is a remarkably dynamic field, with researchers 
nimbly changing course to invent and pursue great new oppor-
tunities. It is appropriate that priorities in the research program 
should be aligned with the science Drivers and the investments 
in projects. At the same time, it is essential to preserve a diver-
sity of scientific approaches, support, and training for young 
researchers, as well as leadership and forward thinking in the-
oretical and experimental research. It is the research program’s 
flexibility to support new ideas and developments outside 
approved projects that will position the field to develop and 
pursue the next generation of science Drivers.
Recommendation 6: In addition to reaping timely science 
from projects, the research program should provide the 
flexibility to support new ideas and developments.
The research program is the intellectual seed corn of the field. 
Properly cared for, the program will yield a bounty of future 
discoveries and innovations within and beyond particle physics. 
However, the community has been coping with a sequence of 
recent cuts in the research program budgets, and there is a 
strong sense that further erosion without careful evaluation 
will cause great damage.
Recommendation 7: Any further reduction in level of effort 
for research should be planned with care, including assess -
ment of potential damage in addition to alignment with the 
P5 vision.
In the constrained budget Scenarios, the funding for the 
research program plus operations is set by the budget fraction 
devoted to project construction to maintain the pace of dis -
covery and leadership in key areas. Especially in the lowest 
budget Scenario, it may be unavoidable that there will be some 
years of flat-flat budgets for the research program. However, 
the effect of such declines in effort should be carefully assessed 
and appropriately balanced with other reductions, including 
those in the ongoing operations budgets, given the priorities 
of the science Drivers.
Recommendation 8: As with the research program and con-
struction projects, facility and laboratory operations budgets 
should be evaluated to ensure alignment with the P5 vision.

=== PAGE 20 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 10
Experiments that can provide essential information to particle 
physics are sometimes hosted by U.S. agencies other than the 
U.S. particle physics funding agencies (DOE-HEP , NSF-PHY). 
An important example is provided by neutrinoless double-beta 
decay experiments, which address one of the most significant 
questions in the neutrino Driver and which are stewarded in 
the U.S. by the DOE Office of Nuclear Physics, with construction 
contributions also from NSF Particle Astrophysics. Modest 
levels of support by the U.S. particle physics funding agencies 
for particle physicist participation in such experiments, as well 
as in experiments hosted by other nations without major U.S. 
construction investments, can be of great mutual benefit.
Recommendation 9: Funding for participation of U.S. particle 
physicists in experiments hosted by other agencies and other 
countries is appropriate and important but should be eval-
uated in the context of the Drivers and the P5  Criteria and 
should not compromise the success of prioritized and 
approved particle physics experiments.
2.2: Project-specific Recommendations
Near-term and Mid-term High-energy Colliders
The nearest-term high-energy collider, the LHC and its 
upgrades, is a core part of the U.S. particle physics program, 
with unique physics opportunities addressing three of the main 
science Drivers (Higgs, New Particles, Dark Matter). The ongo-
ing Phase-1 upgrade should be completed by 2018. The Phase-2 
luminosity upgrade (HL-LHC)—encompassing both the gen-
eral-purpose experiments (ATLAS and CMS) and the accelerator 
—is required to fully exploit the physics opportunities offered 
by the ultimate energy and luminosity performance of the LHC. 
The HL-LHC is strongly supported and is the first high-priority 
large-category project in our recommended program. It should 
move forward without significant delay to ensure that the accel-
erator and experiments can continue to function effectively 
beyond the end of this decade and meet the project schedule. 
The experiments have significant discovery potential, are com-
plex, and operate in a very challenging environment. For these 
reasons, and because of the crucial roles U.S. scientists are 
playing in the construction, operation, and physics exploitation 
of both experiments, there is great value in continuing the 
strong U.S. participation in both the ATLAS and CMS experi-
ments. We note that, as in the past, the contributed hardware 
is designed and built in the U.S. 
ATLAS and CMS were constructed and are now used by inter-
national collaborations involving nearly two hundred institu-
tions with funding from approximately forty nations. The LHC 
program is a model for successful international science projects, 
and the LHC experiments are a model for international collab-
orations. The U.S. contingents in ATLAS and CMS consist of 
600–700 scientists each, from approximately 90 universities 
and five DOE Office of Science national laboratories. They form 
the largest national groups in both experiments and are the 
largest fraction of the U.S. particle physics community. The 
U.S. LHC program is a successful interagency partnership of 
the NSF Physics Division and the DOE Office of High Energy 
Physics, with each agency supporting numerous research 
groups in distinctive roles in the experiments. Those roles 
include designing, delivering, and operating particle detectors, 
producing new physics results, and serving visibly in collabo-
ration leadership. The U.S. also contributed critical components 
and unique technical expertise to the construction of the LHC 
accelerator. Similarly, the experiments and accelerator upgrades 
cannot occur without the unique U.S. technical capabilities 
(e.g., the high-field magnets necessary for the success of the 
project) and resources. Continuing the successful inter-agency 
collaboration, with their distinctive roles and contributions, 
in the upgrade era will bring benefits to DOE and NSF, as well 
as to their respective research communities.
In addition, the participation in the LHC continues to be a 
successful example of U.S. reliability in international partner-
ships, and it can serve as a stimulus and model of the great 
mutual benefits while further partnerships, such as for the 
U.S.-hosted neutrino program, are formulated.
 
Recommendation 10: Complete the LHC phase- 1 upgrades 
and continue the strong collaboration in the LHC with the 
phase-2  (HL-LHC) upgrades of the accelerator and both 
general-purpose experiments (ATLAS and CMS). The LHC 
upgrades constitute our highest-priority near-term large 
project.

=== PAGE 21 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 11
The interest expressed in Japan in hosting the International 
Linear Collider (ILC), a 500  GeV e+e– accelerator upgradable 
to 1 TeV, is an exciting development. Following substantial 
running of the HL-LHC, the cleanliness of the e +e– collisions 
and the nature of particle production at the ILC would result 
in significantly extended discovery potential as described in 
the Drivers sections, mainly through increased precision of 
measurements such as for Higgs boson properties. The ILC 
would then follow the HL-LHC as a complementary instrument 
for performing these studies in a global particle physics pro-
gram, providing a stream of results exploring three of our 
Drivers for many decades. 
The U.S. has played key roles in the design of the ILC acceler -
ator, including leadership in the Global Design Effort. Continued 
intellectual contributions to the accelerator and detector design 
are still necessary to enable a site-specific bid proposal, which 
would take advantage of unique U.S. accelerator physics exper-
tise such as positron source design, beam delivery, supercon -
ducting RF, and the accelerator-detector interface. Particle 
physics groups in the U.S. also led the design of one of the two 
ILC detector concepts. The required capabilities of the detectors 
to perform precision measurements are challenging and need 
continued technology development. Support for both the accel-
erator and advanced detector development efforts would 
enhance expertise and ensure a strong position for the U.S. 
within the ILC global project.
Participation by the U.S. in ILC project construction depends 
on a number of key factors, some of which are beyond the 
scope of P5 and some of which depend on budget Scenarios. 
As the physics case is extremely strong, we plan in all Scenarios 
for ILC support at some level through a decision point within 
the next five years. If the ILC proceeds, there is a high-priority 
option in Scenario C to enable the U.S. to play world-leading 
roles. Even if there are no additional funds available, some 
hardware contributions may be possible in Scenario B, depend-
ing on the status of international agreements at that time. If 
the ILC does not proceed, then ILC work would terminate and 
those resources could be applied to accelerator R&D and 
advanced detector technology R&D.
Recommendation 11: Motivated by the strong scientific 
importance of the ILC and the recent initiative in Japan to 
host it, the U.S. should engage in modest and appropriate 
levels of ILC accelerator and detector design in areas where 
the U.S. can contribute critical expertise. Consider higher 
levels of collaboration if ILC proceeds.
Neutrino Oscillation Experiments
Short- and long-baseline oscillation experiments directly probe 
three of the questions of the neutrino science Driver: How are 
the neutrino masses ordered? Do neutrinos and antineutrinos 
oscillate differently? Are there additional neutrino types and 
interactions? There is a vibrant international neutrino commu-
nity invested in pursuing the physics of neutrino oscillations. 
The U.S. has unique accelerator capabilities at Fermilab to 
provide neutrino beams for both short- and long-baseline 
experiments, with some experiments underway. A long-baseline 
site is also available at the Sanford Underground Research 
Facility in South Dakota. Many of these current and future 
experiments and projects share the same technical challenges. 
Interest and expertise in neutrino physics and detector devel-
opment of groups from around the world combined with the 
opportunities for experiments at Fermilab provide the essentials 
for an international neutrino program.
Recommendation 12: In collaboration with international 
partners, develop a coherent short- and long-baseline neu-
trino program hosted at Fermilab.
For a long-baseline oscillation experiment, based on the science 
Drivers and what is practically achievable in a major step for -
ward, we set as the goal a mean sensitivity to CP violation 2 of 
better than 3σ (corresponding to 99.8% confidence level for a 
detected signal) over more than 75%  of the range of possible 
values of the unknown CP-violating phase δCP. By current esti-
mates, this goal corresponds to an exposure of 600 kt*MW*yr 
assuming systematic uncertainties of 1% and 5% for the signal 
and background, respectively. With a wideband neutrino beam 
produced by a proton beam with power of 1.2 MW, this exposure 
implies a far detector with fiducal mass of more than 40 kilotons 
(kt) of liquid argon (LAr) and a suitable near detector. The 
minimum requirements to proceed are the identified capa-
bility to reach an exposure of at least 120 kt*MW*yr by the 
 2 Three of the most important symmetry operations in physics are charge conjugation, C, in which particles are replaced by their antiparticles; parity inversion, P , in 
which all three spatial co-ordinates are reversed; and time reversal, T.  CP violation, the lack of invariance under the combined operations of C and P , is involved in the 
dominance of matter over antimatter in the Universe. Why there is matter but very little antimatter is still a big mystery that likely requires physics beyond the Stan-
dard Model.

=== PAGE 22 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 12
2035 timeframe, the far detector situated underground with 
cavern space for expansion to at least 40 kt LAr fiducial vol-
ume, and 1.2 MW beam power upgradable to multi-megawatt 
power. The experiment should have the demonstrated capa-
bility to search for supernova (SN) bursts and for proton 
decay, providing a significant improvement in discovery 
sensitivity over current searches for the proton lifetime.
These minimum requirements are not met by the current LBNE 
project’s CD-1  minimum scope. The long-baseline neutrino 
program plan has undergone multiple significant transforma -
tions since the 2008 P 5 report. Formulated as a primarily 
domestic experiment, the minimal CD-1  configuration with a 
small, far detector on the surface has very limited capabilities. 
A more ambitious long-baseline neutrino facility has also been 
urged by the Snowmass community study and in expressions 
of interest from physicists in other regions. To address even 
the minimum requirements specified above, the expertise and 
resources of the international neutrino community are needed. 
A change in approach is therefore required. The activity 
should be reformulated under the auspices of a new interna-
tional collaboration, as an internationally coordinated and 
internationally funded program, with Fermilab as host. There 
should be international participation in defining the program’s 
scope and capabilities. The experiment should be designed, 
constructed, and operated by the international collaboration. 
The goal should be to achieve, and even exceed if physics even-
tually demands, the target requirements through the broadest 
possible international participation.
Key preparatory activities will converge over the next few years: 
in addition to the international reformulation described above, 
PIP-II design and project definition will be nearing completion, 
as will the necessary refurbishments to the Sanford Underground 
Research Facility. Together, these will set the stage for the facility 
to move from the preparatory to the construction phase around 
2018. The peak in LBNF construction will occur after HL-LHC 
peak construction.
Recommendation 13: Form a new international collaboration 
to design and execute a highly capable Long-Baseline 
Neutrino Facility (LBNF) hosted by the U.S. To proceed, a 
project plan and identified resources must exist to meet  
the minimum requirements in the text. LBNF is the highest- 
priority large project in its timeframe. 
The PIP-II project at Fermilab is a necessary investment in 
physics capability, enabling the world’s most intense neutrino 
beam, providing the wideband capability for LBNF, as well as 
high proton intensities for other opportunities, and it is also 
an investment in national accelerator laboratory infrastructure. 
The project has already attracted interest from several potential 
international partners.
Recommendation 14: Upgrade the Fermilab proton accel-
erator complex to produce higher intensity beams. R&D for 
the Proton Improvement Plan II (PIP-II) should proceed 
immediately, followed by construction, to provide proton 
beams of >1  MW by the time of first operation of the new 
long-baseline neutrino facility.
Hints from short-baseline experiments suggest possible new 
non-interacting neutrino types or non-standard interactions 
of ordinary neutrinos. These anomalies can be addressed by 
proposed experiments with neutrinos from radioactive sources, 
pion decay-at-rest beams, pion and kaon decay-in-flight beams, 
muon-decay beams, or nuclear reactors. A judiciously selected 
subset of experiments can definitively address the sterile-neu-
trino interpretation of the anomalies and potentially provide 
a platform for detector development and international coor -
dination toward LBNF. These small-scale experiments are in 
addition to the small projects portfolio described above, and 
therefore appear separately in Table 1. The short-term short-base-
line (SBL) science and detector development program and the 
long-term LBNF program should be made as coherent as possible 
in an optimized neutrino program.
Recommendation 15: Select and perform in the short term 
a set of small-scale short-baseline experiments that can 
conclusively address experimental hints of physics beyond 
the three-neutrino paradigm. Some of these experiments 
should use liquid argon to advance the technology and build 
the international community for LBNF at Fermilab. 
As discussed in Section 3.2, RADAR and CHIPS are both ideas 
for new detectors exploiting the existing NuMI beamline to  

=== PAGE 23 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 13
improve knowledge of oscillation parameters. The RADAR pro-
posal is to build a liquid argon TPC at the Ash River site, thereby 
offsetting R&D costs for LBNF. CHIPS proposes a large water 
Cherenkov detector in a water-filled mine pit, first at a NuMI 
off-axis location, and possibly later as an off-axis LBNF detector. 
Although one might gain some incremental sensitivity beyond 
NOνA and T2K in the shorter term with RADAR or CHIPS, the 
CP and mass hierarchy reach is reduced compared to that of 
the LBNF configuration, and these experiments are less capable 
for proton decay, atmospheric neutrinos, and SN burst neutri-
nos. A strategy focusing resources on moving ahead as fast as 
possible on LBNF is therefore favored.
DAEδALUS is a different approach to the measurement of δCP, 
using multiple high-power cyclotrons to generate a large neu-
trino flux from pion decay-at-rest at a large water Cherenkov 
or liquid scintillator detector. The concept still requires signif-
icant development, and a suitable large-detector target has 
not yet been selected. IsoDAR is a proposed precursor phase 
to DAEδ ALUS with a well-defined short-baseline neutrino-  
oscillation physics program using cyclotron-produced 8Li decay 
at rest. IsoDAR should be considered in the context of a 
short-baseline oscillation program. Similarly, P5 heard presen-
tations about several other concepts for projects whose ulti-
mate construction scope would be large but whose near-term 
request for R&D funding is small. These include the Storage 
Ring Proton EDM Experiment and NNbarX, both of which 
address P5  Drivers. Development has not yet advanced to a 
point at which it would be possible to consider recommenda-
tions to move forward with any of these projects. The R&D for 
these projects would fit as candidates in the small projects 
portfolio, with the path to eventual implementation presumably 
being among the evaluation criteria.
LAr1 is a mid-scale short-baseline accelerator-based experiment 
to address both the neutrino and antineutrino SBL anomalies. 
An appropriate combination of smaller near-term projects may 
accomplish most of these goals at much lower cost, so pro-
ceeding with LAr1 is not recommended at this time. 
PINGU, an infill array concept at the IceCube facility, may also 
have the interesting potential to determine the neutrino mass 
hierarchy using atmospheric neutrinos sooner than other  
competing methods, as well as have sensitivity to low-mass 
WIMP dark matter. The details of the experiment are still under 
development, and we encourage continued work to understand 
systematics. PINGU could play a very important role as part 
of a larger upgrade of IceCube, or as a separate upgrade, but 
more work is required.
NuSTORM is a proposal for a small muon storage ring to produce 
~GeV neutrinos and antineutrinos with the advantage of a pre-
cisely known flux. The facility would also serve as an intense 
source of low-energy muons and serve as a technology demon-
strator for a future neutrino factory. The physics reach of this 
program includes sensitive sterile neutrino searches and preci-
sion neutrino cross-section measurements. Although the concept 
is attractive as a first step towards a neutrino factory and as a 
means to reduce the beam-related systematic errors for LBNF, 
the high cost makes it impossible to pursue at the same time as 
PIP-II and LBNF, which are the primary objectives.
Cosmic Surveys
Astronomical observations have provided evidence for dark 
energy and inflation, physics that powered two epochs of cos-
mic acceleration. DESI, LSST, and CMB-S4 provide complemen-
tary, breakthrough capabilities to survey the sky with the aim 
of understanding these phenomena and what they say about 
particle physics. They also provide important probes of neutrino 
properties.
The DESI project provides a major leap forward in the study 
of dark energy, while also making important contributions to 
the physics of inflation and neutrinos. An integral part of the 
comprehensive dark energy program, it can address the key 
questions with exquisite precision. DESI is technically ready 
to proceed, arrangements with international partners are well 
advanced, and it is well timed with an interagency opportunity 
for the use of the Mayall 4-meter facility on Kitt Peak. DESI is 
an important part of the particle physics program and scien-
tifically and programmatically timely. Given this, there is great 
concern that DESI did not fit into the leanest budget Scenario.
Recommendation 16: Build DESI as a major step forward in 
dark energy science, if funding permits (see Scenarios dis -
cussion below).

=== PAGE 24 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 14
The physics case for LSST is undiminished relative to its top-
rank priority in the NRC Astro2010 Decadal Survey. Its break-
through capabilities will be transformational for a broad range 
of science, including two of the Drivers. The project is well 
underway and is a good example of successful multi-agency 
cooperation. 
Recommendation 17: Complete LSST as planned.
Measurements of the cosmic microwave background (CMB) 
have historically been funded primarily by sources outside of 
particle physics. The experiments now have the capability to 
access the ultra-high energy physics of inflation and important 
neutrino properties. These measurements are of central signif-
icance to particle physics. Particle physics groups at the DOE 
laboratories have unique capabilities, e.g., in sensor technology 
and production of large sensor arrays that are essential to future 
CMB experiments as the technological sophistication and scale 
of the experiments expands. The participation of particle phys-
icists in cases in which they contribute unique expertise is war-
ranted. For these reasons, substantially increased particle 
physics funding of CMB research and projects is appropriate 
in the context of continued multiagency partnerships. As the 
scale of CMB experiments grows from Stage 3, which is of the 
size of an experiment in the small project portfolio, to Stage 4 
(S4), which is mid-scale, increased international collaboration 
and coordination among major CMB projects will be needed. 
Recommendation 18: Support CMB experiments as part of 
the core particle physics program. The multidisciplinary nature 
of the science warrants continued multiagency support. 
Dark Matter
The experimental challenge of discovery and characterization 
of dark matter interactions with ordinary matter requires a 
multi-generational suite of progressively more sensitive and 
ambitious direct detection experiments. This is a highly com-
petitive, rapidly evolving field with excellent potential for dis-
covery. The second-generation direct detection experiments 
are ready to be designed and built, and should include the search 
for axions, and the search for low-mass (<10 GeV) and high-mass 
WIMPs. Several experiments are needed using multiple  
target materials to search the available spin-independent and 
spin-dependent parameter space. This suite of experiments 
should have substantial cross-section reach, as well as the abil-
ity to confirm or refute current anomalous results. Investment 
at a level substantially larger than that called for in the 2012  
joint agency announcement of opportunity will be required 
for a program of this breadth.
Recommendation 19: Proceed immediately with a broad 
second-generation (G2 ) dark matter direct detection pro-
gram with capabilities described in the text. Invest in this 
program at a level significantly above that called for in the 
2012 joint agency announcement of opportunity.
The results of G2 direct detection experiments and other con-
temporaneous dark matter searches will guide the technology 
and design of third-generation experiments. As the scale of these 
experiments grows to increase sensitivity, the experimental 
challenge of direct detection will still require complementary 
experimental techniques, and international cooperation will be 
warranted. The U.S. should host at least one of the third-gener-
ation experiments in this complementary global suite.
Recommendation 20: Support one or more third-generation 
(G3) direct detection experiments, guided by the results of 
the preceding searches. Seek a globally complementary 
program and increased international partnership in G3 
experiments.
The Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA) is the world’s major step 
forward in ground-based gamma-ray astrophysics. Although 
the U.S. pioneered the detection technique, due to funding 
limitations the center of activity has now shifted to Europe. 
U.S. groups are proposing a distinctive and clever addition to 
the project that will significantly enhance the sensitivity to dark 
matter signals in important regions of parameter space. The 
CTA dark matter signal detection capability will be unique. While 
this is of direct importance to particle physics, the broader sci-
ence reach of CTA transcends fields. According to our criteria, 
the project costs should be shared by NSF Astronomy, NSF 
Physics, and DOE, which is the plan presented by the propo-
nents. The scope of the U.S. component of CTA can be reduced 
by up to a factor of two and still provide a valuable increase in 
dark matter signal sensitivity.

=== PAGE 25 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 15
Recommendation 21: Invest in CTA as part of the small proj-
ects portfolio if the critical NSF Astronomy funding can be 
obtained.
Muons and Kaons
The Mu2e and muon g-2 projects represent a large fraction of 
the budget in the early years. These are immediate targets of 
opportunity in the drive to search for new physics, and they 
will help inform future choices of direction. The science case 
is undiminished relative to their earlier prioritization. The pro-
grammatic impacts of large changes at this point were also 
discussed and determined to be generally unwise, although 
the Mu2e profile could be adjusted by a small amount if needed. 
Recommendation 22: Complete the Mu2 e and muon g-2 
projects. 
The ORKA kaon experiment would provide an opportunity to 
make measurements of a process with very small theoretical 
uncertainties in the Standard Model with discovery potential 
for multi-TeV scale new physics. It has the potential for signif-
icant improvement over CERN experiment NA62 , which uses 
a complementary technique and which has a head start. The 
suite of measurements with ORKA would provide excellent 
training for students and postdocs, and this mid-size project 
offers additional balance to the large-scale projects in the field. 
Unfortunately, due to resource constraints and anticipated 
conflicts with the highest priority items in the Fermilab program, 
P5 cannot recommend moving ahead with ORKA at this time. 
Summary of changes in direction
Several of these recommendations represent significant changes 
in direction, which we highlight here:
• Increase to 20%–25% the fraction of the budget devoted to 
construction, and plan with care any further reductions in real 
funding levels for the research program. In our budget exercises, 
we adopted an internal guideline of >40% of the budget to be 
allocated to the research program.
• Change approach for the long-baseline neutrino program. 
The activity should be reformulated as an internationally coor-
dinated and internationally funded program, with Fermilab as 
the host, to reach the science driver goals specified in the text. 
A new international collaboration should be formed. 
• Upgrade the Fermilab proton accelerator complex to produce 
higher intensity beams, redirecting former Project-X activities 
and temporarily redirecting some existing accelerator R&D 
toward this effort. R&D for PIP-II should proceed immediately, 
followed by construction, to provide proton beams of greater 
than one megawatt by the time of first operation of the new 
long-baseline neutrino facility.
• Proceed immediately with a broad second-generation (G2 ) 
dark matter direct detection program with capabilities 
described in the text. Invest in this program at a level signifi-
cantly above that called for in the 2012 joint agency announce-
ment of opportunity.
• Provide increased particle physics funding of CMB research 
and projects, as part of the core particle physics program, in 
the context of continued multiagency partnerships. 
• Re-align activities in accelerator R&D, which is critical to 
enabling future discoveries, based on new physics information 
and long-term needs (see below, Enabling R&D recommenda-
tions). Specifically, reassess the Muon Accelerator Program 
(MAP), incorporating into the general accelerator R&D program 
those activities that are of broad importance to accelerator 
R&D, and consult with international partners on the early ter-
mination of Muon Ionization Cooling Experiment (MICE). In 
addition, in the general accelerator R&D program, focus on 
outcomes and capabilities that will dramatically improve cost 
effectiveness for mid- and far-term accelerators. 
2.3: Funding Scenarios
The Charge provides two constrained budget Scenarios, and 
a third, unconstrained Scenario. These Scenarios are understood 
not to be literal budget guidance but an exercise to help con-
front choices and identify priorities.
Scenario B and Scenario A
Scenario B is defined in the Charge as a constant level of fund-
ing (“flat-flat”) for three years, followed by increases of 3% per 
year with respect to the FY2014 President’s budget request  

=== PAGE 26 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 16
for HEP . Scenario A is defined in the Charge as a constant level 
of funding for three years, followed by increases of 2%  per 
year with respect to the FY2013 budget for HEP . The two bud-
gets start at somewhat different values, though they are similar 
in that they are flat-flat until FY2018. With the 1%  difference 
in escalation rate and the different starting values, the two 
budgets differ by approximately $500M summed over a decade. 
The recommended programs in the three Scenarios are shown 
in Table 1. 
Hard choices were required. While Scenario B allows for a bal-
anced program, based on our Criteria, some excellent projects 
will not be fiscally possible. Moreover, the constant funding 
level in the early years, coupled with the urgently needed 
20%–25% project construction fraction, implies an erosion of 
research effort. The early years are particularly constrained, 
given existing projects that are recommended for completion 
(muon g-2, Mu2e, LSST) and the urgent need to move forward 
with DM G2  experiments, HL-LHC upgrades, and PIP-II. 
Nevertheless, essential progress will be made on each of the 
science Drivers, along with some key investments in U.S. infra-
structure and in future capabilities through R&D.
Scenario A is much more challenging. The reduction relative 
to Scenario B, which is approximately $30M per year until 
FY2018 and then grows over time to $95M in 2024, would have 
very large impacts: 
• DESI would not be possible
• Accelerator R&D and advanced detector R&D would be 
reduced substantially
• Extension of flat-flat research program funding would result 
in further personnel reductions and loss of research capability
• Ramp up of funding for LBNF would be delayed relative to 
Scenario B (preliminary work would proceed immediately in 
both scenarios)
• Third-generation direct detection dark matter capabilities 
would be reduced or delayed
• A small change in the funding profile of Mu2 e would be 
required. 
DESI should be the last project to be cut if moving from 
Scenario B toward Scenario A. A small, limited-time increment 
above Scenario A would make this very important small project 
possible. Scenario A is precarious. It approaches the point 
beyond which hosting a large ($1B scale) project in the U.S. 
would not be possible while maintaining the other elements 
necessary for mission success, particularly a minimal research 
program, the strong leadership position in a small number of 
core, near-term projects, which produce a steady stream of 
important new physics results, and advances in accelerator 
technology. Without the capability to host a large project, the 
U.S. would lose its position as a global leader in this field, and 
the international relationships that have been so productive 
would be fundamentally altered. 
The return on the investment of the relatively small increment 
from Scenario A to Scenario B is large. It provides excellent 
science per incremental dollar by enabling the outstanding 
opportunity of DESI, setting a faster course for the long-base-
line neutrino program, and preserving the long-term invest -
ments in R&D and the research program. Although each is 
highly valuable, none can be accommodated in Scenario A. 

=== PAGE 27 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 17
Table 1 Summary of Scenarios A, B, and C. Each major project considered by P5 is shown, grouped by project size and listed in time order based on year of peak construction. 
Project sizes are: Large (>$200M), Medium ($50M-$200M), and Small (<$50M). The science Drivers primarily addressed by each project are also indicated, along with the 
Frontier technique area (E=Energy, I=Intensity, C=Cosmic) defined in the 2008 P 5 report. 
Higgs
Neutrinos
Dark Matter
Cosm. Accel.
The Unknown
Technique (Frontier)Project/Activity Scenario A Scenario B Scenario C
Table 1
Summary of Scenarios
 Large Projects
Muon program: Mu2e, Muon g-2 Y, Y Y     ✓ I
HL-LHC Y Y Y ✓  ✓  ✓ E
LBNF + PIP-II Y, Y Y, enhanced  ✓   ✓  I,C
ILC R&D only R&D, Y ✓  ✓  ✓ E
NuSTORM N N N  ✓    I
RADAR N N N  ✓    I
 Medium Projects
LSST Y Y Y  ✓  ✓  C
DM G2 Y Y Y   ✓   C
Small Projects Portfolio Y Y Y  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ All
Accelerator R&D and Test Facilities Y, reduced Y, Y, enhanced ✓ ✓ ✓  ✓ E,I
CMB-S4 Y Y Y  ✓  ✓  C
DM G3 Y, reduced Y Y   ✓   C
PINGU Further development of concept encouraged  ✓ ✓   C
ORKA N N N     ✓ I
MAP N N N ✓ ✓ ✓  ✓ E,I
CHIPS N N N  ✓    I
LAr1 N N N  ✓    I
 Additional Small Projects (beyond the Small Projects Portfolio above)
DESI N Y Y  ✓  ✓  C
Short Baseline Neutrino Portfolio Y Y Y  ✓    I
LBNF components 
delayed relative to 
Scenario B.
possibly small  
hardware contri- 
butions. See text.
some reductions with 
redirection to  
PIP-II development
Mu2e small reprofile 
needed
Scenarios Science Drivers

=== PAGE 28 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 18
Figure 1
Construction and Physics Timeline
FIGURE 1 Approximate construction (blue; above line) and expected physics (green; below line) profiles for the recommended major projects, grouped by size 
(Large [>$200M] in the upper section, Medium and Small [<$200M] in the lower section), shown for Scenario B. The LHC: Phase 1  upgrade is a Medium project, but 
shown next to the HL-LHC for context. The figure does not show the suite of small experiments that will be built and produce new results regularly.  
 Project 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035
Currently operating
 Large Projects 
Mu2e
LHC: Phase 1 upgrade
HL-LHC
LBNF
ILC
 Medium and Small Projects
LSST
DESI
DM G2
DM G3
CMB S4

=== PAGE 29 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 19
Scenario C
We now turn to the unconstrained Scenario C given in our 
Charge. Although many projects were not possible in Scenario 
B, our vision for Scenario C is not a long list of projects. Instead, 
we focus on a few high-priority opportunities that would each 
dramatically enhance key elements of the strategic plan rec -
ommended for Scenarios A and B.
The U.S. could move boldly toward development of transfor -
mational accelerator R&D. There are profound questions to 
answer in particle physics, and recent discoveries reconfirm 
the value of continued investments. Going much further, how-
ever, requires changing the capability-cost curve of accelerators, 
which can only happen with an aggressive, sustained, and 
imaginative R&D program. A primary goal, therefore, is the 
ability to build the future-generation accelerators at dramat -
ically lower cost. For example, the primary enabling technology 
for proton-proton (pp) colliders is high-field accelerator mag -
nets, possibly with more advanced superconductors. For e +e– 
colliders, primary goals are improving the accelerating gradient 
and lowering the power consumption. Although these topics 
are R&D priorities in the constrained budget scenarios, larger 
investments could make these far-future accelerators techni-
cally and financially feasible on much shorter timescales. A 
detailed vision and roadmap should be articulated by the 
upcoming HEPAP Subcommittee on Accelerator R&D. As work 
proceeds worldwide on long-term future-generation accelerator 
concepts, the U.S. should be counted among the potential host 
nations. Experience suggests this effort will also have large, 
positive impacts beyond particle physics.
The interest expressed in Japan in hosting the International 
Linear Collider (ILC), a 500  GeV e+e– accelerator upgradable 
to 1 TeV, is an exciting development. Decisions by governments 
on whether or not to proceed, and the levels of participation, 
depend on many factors beyond the scope of P5; however, we 
emphasize most strongly that the scientific justification for 
the project is compelling. Should the ILC go forward, Scenario 
C would enable the U.S. to play world-leading roles in the 
detector program as well as provide critical expertise and accel-
erator components.
In addition, the U.S. could offer to host a large water Cherenkov 
neutrino detector to complement the LBNF liquid argon detec-
tor, unifying the global long-baseline neutrino community to 
take full advantage of the world’s highest intensity neutrino 
beam. The placement of the water and liquid argon detectors 
would be optimized for complementarity. This approach would 
be an excellent example of global cooperation and planning. 
2.4: Enabling R&D
Together the GARD, Stewardship, and NSF programs form the 
critical basis for accelerator R&D, enabling particle physics and 
many other fields. All of these programs provide essential 
training for accelerator physicists and engineers. Given the 
substantive investments in such programs overseas, appropriate 
investments should be made in the U.S. to ensure a continued 
competitiveness by offering opportunities that attract and 
retain the very best and that enable development of critical 
technology. Historically, operation of high energy physics facil-
ities provided research and training opportunities in accelerator 
science. With the termination or repurposing of these facilities, 
ensuring access to accelerator test facilities will help maintain 
the knowledge base and advance the field.
 
Recommendation 23: Support the discipline of accelerator 
science through advanced accelerator facilities and through 
funding for university programs. Strengthen national lab-  
oratory-university R&D partnerships, leveraging their diverse 
expertise and facilities.
Far-term Future-Generation Accelerators
The motivation for future-generation accelerators must be the 
science Drivers. The aforementioned R&D efforts are required 
to establish the technical feasibility and to make the costs 
reasonable. The future-generation accelerators are listed here 
in order of the strength of the physics case, as currently 
understood.
 
A very high-energy proton-proton collider is the most powerful 
future tool for direct discovery of new particles and interactions 
under any scenario of physics results that can be acquired in 
the P5 time window. Colliders of energy up to 100 TeV, with a 
circumference of about 100 km with an option of e+e–, are pres-
ently under study at CERN, in China, and in the U.S. Extensive 

=== PAGE 30 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 20
R&D is required to make such a collider feasible at a reasonable 
cost. The U.S. is the world leader in R&D on high-field super -
conducting magnet technology, which will be a critical enabling 
technology for such a collider. Future R&D follows naturally 
from the directed R&D now conducted by the LARP program 
for the HL-LHC.
 
Recommendation 24: Participate in global conceptual design 
studies and critical path R&D for future very high-energy 
proton-proton colliders. Continue to play a leadership role 
in superconducting magnet technology focused on the dual 
goals of increasing performance and decreasing costs.
 
A multi-TeV e+e– collider could be based on either the Compact 
Linear Collider (CLIC) or plasma-based wakefield technology. 
The wakefield technology would be done as an energy upgrade 
to the ILC, or located elsewhere. 
 
Neutrino factories based on muon storage rings could provide 
higher intensity and higher quality neutrino beams than con-
ventional high power proton beams on targets. This concept 
would be attractive for an international long-baseline neutrino 
program offering more precise and complete studies of neutrino 
physics beyond short-term and mid-term facilities.
 
Muon colliders can reach higher energies than e+e– accelerators, 
but have many technical challenges. Addressing all of the nec-
essary challenges would require a very strong physics motiva-
tion based on results from ongoing or future accelerators. 
The Muon Accelerator Program (MAP) currently aims at tech-
nology feasibility studies for far-term muon storage rings for 
neutrino factories and for muon colliders, including the Muon 
Ionization Cooling Experiment (MICE) at the Rutherford 
Appleton Laboratory. The large value of sin2(2θ13) enables the 
next generation of oscillation experiments to use conventional 
neutrino beams, pushing the time frame when neutrino facto-
ries might be needed further into the future, and the small 
Higgs mass enables study at more technically ready e+e– col-
liders, reducing the near-term necessity of muon colliders.
Recommendation 25: Reassess the Muon Accelerator 
Program (MAP). Incorporate into the GARD program the 
MAP activities that are of general importance to accelerator 
R&D, and consult with international partners on the early 
termination of MICE.
Recommendation 26: Pursue accelerator R&D with high 
priority at levels consistent with budget constraints. Align 
the present R&D program with the P5  priorities and long-
term vision, with an appropriate balance among general 
R&D, directed R&D, and accelerator test facilities and among 
short-, medium-, and long-term efforts. Focus on outcomes 
and capabilities that will dramatically improve cost effec -
tiveness for mid-term and far-term accelerators.
 
A HEPAP subcommittee on accelerator R&D will provide 
detailed guidance on the implementation of accelerator R&D 
aligned with P5 priorities.
 
Instrumentation R&D
The particle physics detector community has historically been 
an important contributor to broadly applicable innovation in 
instrumentation. A recent example is the key role of ultra-sen-
sitive transition edge bolometers in CMB experiments. A rich 
spectrum of challenging physics experiments is planned that 
requires advances in instrumentation. The challenges include 
ever-greater requirements for sensitivity and performance. It 
is only through investments in the development of advanced, 
cost-effective new technologies that the science goals can be 
met. With the recommended increase in new project construc-
tion (Recommendation 5), detector R&D activity will shift toward 
addressing the relatively near-term requirements of the LHC 
detectors and the neutrino program. This shift will enable these 
projects to realize their physics program in a cost-constrained 
environment. For the longer term, a portfolio balanced between 
incremental and transformational R&D is required. 
 
Recommendation 27: Focus resources toward directed instru-
mentation R&D in the near-term for high-priority projects. 
As the technical challenges of current high-priority projects 
are met, restore to the extent possible a balanced mix of 
short-term and long-term R&D.

=== PAGE 31 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 21
To alleviate the serious shortage of physicists with a background 
in instrumentation, workforce training at the graduate or post-
doctoral level and promising career opportunities are necessary 
to accomplish and sustain research. University infrastructure 
to support teaching of instrumentation has decreased over 
the last decade, which has adversely affected the ability of 
universities to train students.
Recommendation 28: Strengthen university-national labo-
ratory partnerships in instrumentation R&D through invest-
ment in instrumentation at universities. Encourage graduate 
programs with a focus on instrumentation education at HEP 
supported universities and laboratories, and fully exploit 
the unique capabilities and facilities offered at each.
Computing
The recent Report from the Topical Panel Meeting on Computing 
and Simulations in High Energy Physics3 articulated the challenges 
involved in meeting the increasing computational needs of the 
field and suggested steps to take full advantage of cost-effective 
computing solutions. The present practice is to handle much 
of the computing within individual projects. Rapidly evolving 
computer architectures and increasing data volumes require 
effective crosscutting solutions that are being developed in 
other science disciplines and in industry. Mechanisms are 
needed for the continued maintenance and development of 
major software frameworks and tools for particle physics and 
long-term data and software preservation, as well as investments 
to exploit next-generation hardware and computing models. 
Close collaboration of national laboratories and universities 
across the research areas will be needed to take advantage of 
industrial developments and to avoid duplication.
 
Recommendation 29: Strengthen the global cooperation 
among laboratories and universities to address computing 
and scientific software needs, and provide efficient training 
in next-generation hardware and data-science software 
relevant to particle physics. Investigate models for the 
development and maintenance of major software within 
and across research areas, including long-term data and 
software preservation.
 3The Report from the Topical Panel Meeting on Computing and Simulations in High Energy Physics can be obtained at: http://science.energy.gov/hep/news-and-resources/reports/

=== PAGE 32 ===


=== PAGE 33 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 23
The Science Drivers 3
This section provides more detailed descriptions of the five science Drivers, as well as the R&D programs needed to address the Drivers. Further information can be 
obtained at the Snowmass archive: http://www.slac.stanford.edu/econf/C1307292 /, and references therein.

=== PAGE 34 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 24


=== PAGE 35 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 25
3.1: Use the Higgs Boson as a New Tool  
for Discovery
The recently discovered Higgs boson is understood to be a 
form of matter never before observed: a scalar boson—a fun-
damental particle with no spin—that generates the masses of 
the other fundamental particles in the Standard Model. 
However, the Higgs boson remains a mystery. What principles 
determine the values of its couplings to quarks and leptons? 
How is it related to neutrino masses? Does it couple to dark 
matter? Is there one Higgs particle or many? Is the Higgs boson 
really fundamental or is it composed of other constituent par-
ticles? Does it interact with particles and antiparticles in exactly 
the same way? This new particle offers a unique portal to under-
standing the laws of Nature and connects several areas of 
particle physics. It is a great new tool for discovery. 
Now that the Higgs boson mass is known, the Standard Model 
predicts its interactions and properties with no free parameters. 
Any deviation from these predictions provides unambiguous 
evidence for new physics, making a rigorous study of the Higgs 
boson truly compelling. By measuring the Higgs boson inter -
actions with the other Standard Model particles to percent-level 
precision, new physics can be explored in a general way at 
energy scales that are well beyond the beam energies of con-
temporary accelerators; the Higgs self-interactions can be 
studied to verify what causes the Higgs field to produce the 
masses of the other fundamental particles; the search for Higgs 
boson decays to undetected (“invisible” or “dark sector”) par-
ticles may reveal critical clues that unlock the mystery of dark 
matter; and vector boson production can be studied to verify 
the key roles the Higgs field is presumed to play in the Standard 
Model. Thus, the precision measurements of Higgs properties 
will provide a valuable look ahead to possible physics at far-fu-
ture colliders, informing critical choices of direction. 
Higgs boson properties: enabling discovery
To unlock its secrets, there are key properties of the Higgs 
boson that must be understood in detail:
Higgs boson interactions with Standard Model particles: The inter-
action strengths (couplings) of the Higgs boson to the other 
particles of the Standard Model are of particular significance.  
The predictions of well-motivated scenarios of new physics 
generically place deviations in these couplings from their 
Standard Model values at the few percent level, ultimately 
requiring measurement of these couplings at the percent or 
sub-percent level to advance knowledge in many crucial ave-
nues of exploration. The pattern of possible deviations of the 
couplings adds essential knowledge in discovering the under-
lying structure of the new mechanisms involved. In this way, 
knowledge can be gained about the existence of new particles 
that are predicted in many theories, including additional Higgs 
bosons that may share the role of generating masses for par -
ticles. This complements the direct search for extra Higgs 
bosons and other new particles at colliders. These precision 
measurements can also signal whether the Higgs boson is ele-
mentary or a bound state of new fundamental fermions. In 
particular, the top quark may have special interactions with 
the Higgs boson since it is the heaviest quark and its couplings 
may reveal new interactions. Lastly, a small admixture of CP 
violation may be present in the Higgs boson couplings to the 
Standard Model particles and this could contribute to the 
observed matter-antimatter asymmetry in the Universe.
Higgs boson interactions with new particles: It is possible that 
the Higgs boson interacts with dark matter and may provide 
the only interaction (beyond gravity) between dark matter and 
the Standard Model. The Higgs boson may thus serve as a 
valuable portal to the dark sector and the question of whether 
the Higgs boson also generates masses for particles in the dark 
sector is a crucial one. The rate for such decays (including 
“invisible decays”) is likely to be small and a high level of sen-
sitivity is needed for their detection. In addition, the total decay 
rate, i.e., the width of the Higgs boson, sums over all of its 
possible decay modes and is one of its most important char -
acteristics. This quantity affects nearly all of the Higgs boson 
interactions and can reveal hidden decay channels.
Higgs boson interactions with itself: The Higgs boson is expected 
to interact with itself via couplings that are governed by the 
Standard Model Higgs potential. The determination of these 
self-couplings measures the shape of the Higgs potential and 
probes for the effects of new physics at very high energies. 
Measurements of the Higgs self-coupling are performed by  
observing double Higgs boson production at colliders. These  

=== PAGE 36 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 26
are difficult measurements, requiring high energies and high 
statistics.
Higgs boson interactions with neutrinos: The tiny masses of neu-
trinos indicate that they may interact with the Higgs sector in 
a special way. Either neutrinos couple to the Higgs boson very, 
very weakly, or neutrinos interact with a different Higgs boson, 
or neutrinos receive their mass from a completely different 
mechanism. Some models suggest that collider searches for 
rare Higgs decay modes and for new scalar particles that couple 
predominantly to leptons, together with searches for neutri-
noless double-beta decay, charged-lepton flavor violation, and 
other related processes, could provide essential clues about 
how neutrinos communicate with the Higgs field.
Role of the Higgs boson in vector boson scattering:  Without the 
Higgs boson, the probability for the scattering of two weak 
vector bosons exceeds unity at high energies. In the Standard 
Model, probability is conserved when the Higgs boson contri-
butions to this scattering are included. This important high-en-
ergy behavior still needs to be tested experimentally and could 
exhibit deviations due to new particles that couple only to the 
electroweak gauge sector, or due to new strongly interacting 
Higgs-boson-like states.
Higgs Opportunities
All signs point to the important discovery potential of per -
cent-level precision studies of Higgs properties. The determi-
nation of these properties is one of the top priorities in the 
physics program of high-energy colliders. The complementary 
aspects of hadron and electron-positron colliders are both 
needed to carry out this program to its fullest extent. Full 
exploitation of such a precision program will also require sig -
nificant improvements in theoretical higher-order calculations 
of the Higgs boson mass, production, and decay, as well as 
better knowledge of key external inputs to these calculations 
such as the mass of the b -quark. 
The LHC will be the first laboratory to use the Higgs boson as a 
tool for discovery, first with a run of 300 fb-1 of integrated lumi-
nosity at 14 TeV, and then with ten times more data (3000 fb-1) 
at the HL-LHC. The LHC can provide a precision measurement  
of the Higgs mass to 100 MeV, improving to about 50  MeV 
with the HL-LHC. The LHC/HL-LHC measures the product of 
production rates for Higgs bosons with the Higgs branching 
fraction into most fermions and gauge bosons. By either assum-
ing the Standard Model predictions for some couplings, or by 
making some minimal model-dependent assumptions, global 
fits that extract the coupling values to known particles can be 
performed. In this manner, the LHC can measure most of the 
Higgs couplings to the 5–10% level, with the HL-LHC improving 
the precision to a few percent. Invisible decays of the Higgs 
boson, such as into dark matter, are detected by “observing” 
missing energy at colliders. In this manner, the HL-LHC can 
probe for invisible decays to a sensitivity of 10% for the branch-
ing fraction. The HL-LHC also provides unique capabilities to 
study statistically limited Standard Model decays such as  
H → µ+µ– (giving access to couplings to the second-generation 
fermions) as well as other possible exotic decay channels. A 
direct demonstration of the Higgs boson’s role in the mecha-
nism of restoration of unitarity in vector boson scattering is 
also a prime motivator for the HL-LHC. Indications of the Higgs 
self-coupling through the first observations of double-Higgs 
production may also be possible. The HL-LHC has a compelling 
and comprehensive program that will make essential measure-
ments of the Higgs properties. 
After the HL-LHC, the next opportunity to investigate the 
properties of the Higgs in detail is an e +e– collider, of which 
the International Linear Collider (ILC ) is the most mature in 
its design and readiness for construction. The unique combi-
nation of the relatively simple Higgs boson production mech-
anism and the clean e +e– collision environment enables mea-
surements of the branching fraction for all possible Higgs decay 
channels, including invisible decays, decay modes that are 
undetectable at the LHC/HL-LHC due to large backgrounds, 
and exotic decay topologies into new particles that may only 
interact with the Higgs. The ILC thus greatly increases the 
sensitivity to the Higgs boson couplings to particles in the dark 
sector and other new physics. After initial 250 GeV running, 
operation at 500 GeV provides increased rates of Higgs pro -
duction and access to couplings via vector boson fusion and 
ttH production. In a completely model-independent way, most 
Higgs couplings can then be determined to the percent or 
sub-percent level, and the total width to about 5% . This level 
of precision is necessary to establish signals at the 3–5 sigma 

=== PAGE 37 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 27
level for couplings that differ from the Standard Model by a 
few percent and thus reaches the theoretical target. In addition, 
the ILC can measure the top-quark and Higgs-boson mass to 
better than 0.1% and determine the CP admixture of the Higgs 
boson at the level predicted in scenarios beyond the Standard 
Model, and an upgraded ILC operating at 1 TeV can measure 
the self-coupling of the Higgs boson to better than 20% .
The hadronic HL-LHC and e +e– ILC are highly complementary 
discovery accelerators. If new particles are observed directly 
at the LHC/HL-LHC, the pattern of deviations in the combined 
measurements of Higgs boson couplings at both the HL-LHC 
and ILC adds essential knowledge in determining the underlying 
structure of the new physics. If no new physics is found directly 
at the LHC/HL-LHC, the precision of the ILC measurements 
for the Higgs couplings can indirectly uncover new physics 
present at mass scales beyond that kinematically accessible 
at the LHC/HL-LHC. 
Longer-term future-generation accelerators bring prospects 
for even better precision in Higgs properties and hence dis -
covery potential. Circular e+e– accelerators, such as the FCC-ee 
project being studied at CERN and the CepC project in China, 
generally have high instantaneous luminosity, multiple detec-
tors, and small statistical uncertainties, and in many cases, 
provide the highest precision on Higgs properties. However, 
the options are limited in collision energy, precluding direct 
measurements of couplings to top quarks or self-couplings. To 
make significant progress in the study of the Higgs potential 
via self-couplings and to fully study the Higgs boson contribu-
tions to vector boson scattering, a ~100 TeV pp collider such 
as the VLHC and/or a multi-TeV e+e– linear collider such as the 
3 TeV CLIC would be necessary. Such accelerators also have 
the highest discovery potential for additional, more massive, 
Higgs bosons. 
A muon collider Higgs factory with center-of-mass collisions at 
the Higgs mass could be contemplated as a first stage toward a 
high-energy muon collider; however, the LHC is already a Higgs 
factory, the ILC is a precision Higgs facility with a completed 
Technical Design Report, and a muon collider still faces many 
technical challenges. Although these considerations weaken the 
case for the muon collider approach, we note that a muon Higgs 
factory could make some unique measurements, particularly  
a direct measurement of the width of the Higgs boson.
Higgs Timeframes
Within the P5  timeframe, the program of Higgs boson mea-
surements that began at the LHC will improve with the higher 
energy and increased integrated luminosity of the 14 TeV LHC 
Run 2. The HL-LHC will operate in the 2020s, increasing the 
precision of the available measurements as data accumulates. 
As the pioneering HL-LHC program ramps down in the early 
2030s, the complementary ILC could launch operations. A 
decade or more will then be needed to achieve the target pre-
cision for Higgs boson measurements at the ILC. Together, the 
HL-LHC and ILC provide a stream of data using the Higgs boson 
as a tool for discovery for several decades. 

=== PAGE 38 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 28


=== PAGE 39 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 29
3.2: Pursue the Physics Associated with 
Neutrino Mass
Propelled by surprising discoveries from a series of pioneering 
experiments, neutrino physics has progressed dramatically 
over the past two decades. A diverse research program exploit-
ing particle astrophysics, accelerator, and reactor experiments 
has uncovered a new landscape in neutrino physics with a very 
promising future for continued discovery. Powerful new facil-
ities are needed to probe many aspects of the puzzling and 
experimentally incomplete picture of neutrino physics.
Particle physicists now know that neutrinos oscillate, i.e., they 
change type (flavor) as they move in space and time. This, in 
turn, implies that neutrinos have non-zero, distinct masses 
and that the lepton flavors mix. A three-flavor paradigm that 
describes the three known Standard Model neutrinos—the 
flavor states—as quantum mechanical mixtures of neutrinos 
with well-defined masses has emerged. It describes almost all 
existing neutrino data successfully. 
These groundbreaking discoveries open the door to addressing 
essential questions:
What is the origin of neutrino mass?
Speculations on the origin of neutrino masses are wide-ranging 
in the absence of more complete experimental information. 
All point to the existence of new physics, ranging from right-
handed neutrinos to the violation of lepton number. One pos-
sibility is that the neutrinos interact with the Higgs field in the 
same way that the electron does, only much more weakly. 
Alternatively, neutrinos may interact with new yet-to-be-dis -
covered Higgs fields. A third option is that neutrino masses 
signal a new ultra-high-energy scale that may be associated 
with the unification of matter and forces, or inflation. Piecing 
together the neutrino mass puzzle will require experimental 
information from several areas of particle physics research, 
from long-baseline neutrino experiments to high-energy col-
liders like the LHC, from searches for rare processes with 
charged-leptons to different probes of the large-scale structure 
of the Universe.
How are the neutrino masses ordered?
Neutrino oscillation experiments measure the neutrino mass-
squared differences along with most of the parameters that 
characterize the relation between the neutrino flavor and mass 
states. The ordering of the neutrino mass differences, referred 
to as the mass hierarchy, remains elusive because the effects 
of the two independent mass-squared differences have not yet 
been observed in a single experiment, nor have researchers 
observed the oscillation-related effects of neutrinos propa-
gating through matter (matter effects) associated with the 
largest of the mass-squared differences. Current- and next-gen-
eration oscillation experiments will address this. Knowledge 
of the mass hierarchy is necessary to reconstruct the values 
of the neutrino masses and to interpret the results of searches 
for the nature of the neutrino, as discussed below.
What are the neutrino masses? 
Neutrino oscillation experiments cannot determine the absolute 
scale of neutrino masses. Precision measurements of the 
beta-decay spectrum offer the least ambiguous direct probe 
of the neutrino masses. Next-generation surveys are sensitive 
to neutrino masses at the 0.3  eV level, and new ideas for 
improvements are being pursued. These efforts, which access 
valuable information to particle physics, are primarily funded 
by nuclear physics agencies.
Cosmic surveys provide the most precise indirect information 
on the values of the neutrino masses. Neutrinos are by far the 
most numerous matter particles in the Universe, so they affect 
the distribution of galaxies and the pattern of anisotropies in 
the cosmic microwave background. Results from current surveys 
provide the tightest constraints on the sum of the neutrino 
masses. Next-generation cosmic surveys—LSST, DESI, CMB-S3, 
CMB-S4—are expected to improve on these by a factor of ten. 
Do neutrinos and antineutrinos oscillate differently?
The fact that neutrino masses are non-zero allows physicists 
to ask whether leptons violate CP invariance. The three-flavor 
paradigm accommodates new (up to three) independent 
sources of CP violation in the form of fundamental parameters 
that govern how matter and antimatter behave differently. 
These may also play a role in understanding why the Universe 
is overwhelmingly made up of matter rather than antimatter.  

=== PAGE 40 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 30
One of these, the CP-violating phase δCP, can only be measured 
in oscillation experiments. Next-generation neutrino oscillation 
experiments, therefore, have the distinct capability of revealing 
whether neutrinos and antineutrinos oscillate differently.
Are there additional neutrino types and interactions? 
It is common practice to analyze oscillation data assuming 
three flavors of neutrinos that interact as prescribed by the 
Standard Model, but neutrinos are a continuous source of sur-
prises. Very large deviations are still allowed. Possible devia-
tions from the three-flavor paradigm include non-interacting 
(or sterile) neutrinos or non-standard interactions of the ordi-
nary neutrinos. In fact, there are hints for physics beyond the 
three-flavor paradigm from short-baseline oscillation experi-
ments using reactors, accelerators and radioactive sources, 
and from cosmic surveys. The current data may be collectively 
explained by the existence of one or more sterile neutrinos 
with masses around 1 eV. The discovery of light sterile neutrinos 
would be of profound importance for fundamental physics. 
While cosmic surveys are sensitive to neutrino masses, they 
are also powerful probes of new phenomena and speak to the 
question of whether currently unknown types of light neutrinos 
were also produced in the early Universe. There is also the 
possibility that the neutrino and dark matter puzzles are related: 
sterile neutrinos with masses in the keV mass range could be 
an important component of dark matter. 
Are neutrinos their own antiparticles? 
The very nature of neutrinos, whether they are their own  
antiparticles (Majorana fermions) or not (Dirac fermions), is 
unknown. Neutrinos are the only fundamental particles that 
could be Majorana fermions. Indeed, most models of the origin 
of neutrino masses predict that this is the case. The answer 
to this question is intimately tied to the status of lepton num-
ber conservation—lepton number violation implies that the 
neutrinos are Majorana fermions. The observation of lepton 
number violation, similar to that of baryon number violation, 
would have a dramatic impact on fundamental physics. On 
the flip side, if neutrinos are Dirac fermions, lepton number 
conservation is a fundamental law of nature. Addressing this 
question is mandatory in order to understand the origin of 
neutrino masses, and experiments to determine the nature  
of the neutrino also inform the program to measure the abso-
lute neutrino mass. 
The most powerful probe of lepton number conservation, and 
whether neutrinos are Dirac or Majorana, is the observation 
of neutrinoless double-beta decay. These are questions and 
experiments of the greatest interest to particle physics. 
Although construction of these experiments is primarily funded 
by DOE Nuclear Physics, which stewards this line of research, 
NSF Particle Astrophysics (PA) funds some construction and 
supports research groups on these experiments. DOE HEP also 
supports some research groups. Next-generation neutrinoless 
double-beta decay experiments are currently being planned 
and prioritized by the Nuclear Science Advisory Committee. 
These experiments are intended to observe a signal if the neu-
trino mass hierarchy is inverted and neutrinos are Majorana 
fermions. Next-generation experiments will continue to benefit 
from strong HEP and PA participation.
Opportunities in Neutrino Oscillation Physics
Neutrino oscillation rates depend not only on the fundamental 
parameters, mass and mixing, but also on experimental param-
eters: the baseline, the neutrino energy, and the event rate driven 
by beam power and detector mass. The combination of all of 
these determines the strength of the oscillation signals observed 
and therefore the sensitivity of the experimental efforts.
The current long-baseline experiments, T2 K in Japan and the 
NOνA experiment in the U.S., have some sensitivity to the 
neutrino mass hierarchy, depending on the value of the 
CP-violating phase δCP. Other near-term proposals, including 
JUNO and PINGU, may provide valuable information. Both are 
very challenging. The PINGU proposal, an infill of the IceCube 
experiment at the South Pole, will attempt to reveal the mass 
hierarchy via the measurement of a very large sample of atmo-
spheric neutrinos. JUNO, instead, hopes to reveal the mass-  
hierarchy through the precision measurement of the reactor 
neutrino flux some 50 km from the source; it should also provide 
precision measurements of other neutrino oscillation param-
eters. There is no current or planned experiment in this decade 
with significant sensitivity to leptonic CP violation. 
The U.S. is well positioned to host a world-leading neutrino  

=== PAGE 41 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 31
physics program. Its centerpiece would be a next-generation 
long-baseline neutrino facility (LBNF). LBNF will combine  
a high-intensity wideband beam, very long baseline, and 
large-volume precision detector to make an accurate measure 
of the oscillated neutrino spectrum. 
LBNF’s 1.2 MW wideband neutrino beam will be realized with 
the Fermilab’s PIP-II upgrade project, which provides very high 
intensities in the Fermilab accelerator complex. The construction 
of PIP-II and the beamline for LBNF will bring major advances 
in accelerator technology in the areas of SCRF and targetry and 
lay the foundation for a possible future neutrino factory. 
A large-volume neutrino detector based on LAr technology 
capable of detecting tracks from charged particles at an 
extremely low threshold will record signals and reject back -
grounds across a wide range of energies in LBNF. The oscillated 
spectra can be compared to the un-oscillated spectra by com-
bining these far detector measurements with those in a near 
detector. 
With these ingredients, combined with a baseline greater than 
1000 km, LBNF can, with a single experiment, measure evidence 
for CP-violation in the lepton sector and provide a definite 
determination of the mass hierarchy, independent of the value 
of δCP. In addition, LBNF has the potential to isolate a sample 
of tau-neutrinos that may play a significant role in testing the 
three-flavor paradigm and revealing the existence of new 
phenomena.
Hyper-Kamiokande (Hyper-K) is a proposed megaton-class water 
Cherenkov detector to be exposed to an off-axis narrowband 
neutrino beam in Japan. Hyper-K would use neutrinos from an 
upgraded MW-class J-PARC accelerator complex at a baseline 
of 295 km, combined with atmospheric neutrinos. The project 
shares many of the goals of LBNF, albeit with a different detector 
technology, different beam characteristics, and a different base-
line. Within the context of a cooperative global program of 
large-scale projects, the formulation of an optimized, coherent, 
long-baseline neutrino program could be explored to strengthen 
the overall global particle physics program. 
Alternatives to LBNF, and alternative routes to LBNF, have  
been proposed. RADAR and CHIPS are both ideas for new 
detectors exploiting the existing NuMI beamline to improve 
knowledge of oscillation parameters. RADAR proposes to build 
a LAr TPC at the Ash River site, thereby combining a physics 
program with detector R&D towards LBNF. CHIPS proposes 
to deploy a large water Cherenkov detector in a water-filled 
mine pit, first at a NuMI off-axis location, and possibly later as 
an off-axis LBNF detector. These could provide some incre-
mental sensitivity beyond NOνA and T2K for mass hierarchy 
and CP violation. DAEδ ALUS is a different approach to the 
measurement of δCP, using multiple high-power cyclotrons to 
generate a large neutrino flux from pion decay-at-rest at a large 
water Cherenkov or liquid scintillator detector. It potentially 
has CP reach comparable to that of LBNF but is insensitive to 
matter effects. 
Going Underground
Underground operation of a massive LAr detector will support 
an enriched physics program that complements and enhances 
the neutrino-physics reach of the accelerator-based program 
and mitigates significant background risks associated with 
operation on the surface. An underground large-volume LAr 
detector will perform precision measurements of atmospheric 
neutrinos, search for nucleon decay, and possibly detect a neu-
trino burst from a core-collapse supernova explosion in the 
Milky Way galaxy, which is predicted to occur with a frequency 
of about three per century. The atmospheric neutrino mea-
surements complement and enhance the oscillation program. 
LBNF’s LAr detector technology is most sensitive to nucleon 
decay into kaons, providing a complementary window to 
searches more sensitive to decays into pions. The significance 
of nucleon decay and its impacts are described in Section 3.5 . 
Supernova neutrinos are messengers both of the mechanism 
of stellar core collapses and of neutrino properties. Supernovae 
release 99% of their vast energy in the form of neutrinos and 
antineutrinos of all flavors. Supernova neutrinos oscillate while 
propagating through the star’s ejecta, carrying information on 
neutrino properties, including the mass hierarchy, as well as  
on the astrophysics of the collapse. Their propagation is mod-
ified by never-observed effects due to neutrino-neutrino inter-
actions, and encodes potential signatures of new physics such 
as new neutrino states and interactions, and neutrino magnetic  

=== PAGE 42 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 32
moments. Precision measurements of supernova-neutrino fluxes 
are also sensitive to new light particles. Measurements of the 
energy spectrum and time structure of the burst with broad 
flavor sensitivity are critical to the extraction of neutrino phys-
ics. Although existing and proposed supernova-neutrino detec-
tors worldwide are primarily sensitive to electron-antineutrinos, 
the LBNF LAr detector has exquisite sensitivity to the elec -
tron-neutrino flavor component, which carries unique physics 
and astrophysics information, including effects from the for -
mation of the remnant neutron star and electron-neutrino-spe-
cific oscillation effects.
Short-Baseline Neutrino Oscillations
The hints from short-baseline experiments suggesting new 
physics can be addressed by several experiments currently 
under construction or in the proposal stage. These would make 
use of neutrinos from radioactive sources, pion decay-at-rest 
beams, pion and kaon decay-in-flight beams, muon-decay 
beams, and nuclear reactors. Different subsets of these efforts 
have the potential of definitively addressing the sterile neutrino 
interpretation of the short-baseline anomalies. The short-base-
line accelerator experiments at Fermilab also provide a platform 
for LAr detector development toward LBNF. Most of these 
proposals are small-scale—ICARUS++, IsoDAR, LAr1 -ND, 
MicroBooNE, OscSNS, PROSPECT—while LAr1 and NuSTORM 
are mid-scale and large-scale, respectively.
Diversity and balance in the neutrino program
The U.S. neutrino program envisioned in this report encom-
passes both small and large experiments in the near- and far-
term to address fundamental questions in particle physics. 
Development of software and hardware for different experi-
ments complement and enhance one another. Data from near-
term experiments produce physics results while construction 
for next-generation experiments is underway. This provides  
a diversity and balance essential for the field. 

=== PAGE 43 ===


=== PAGE 44 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 34


=== PAGE 45 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 35
3.3: Identify the New Physics of  
Dark Matter
Astrophysical observations imply that the known particles of 
the Standard Model make up only about one-sixth of the total 
matter in the Universe. The rest is dark matter (DM), presumed 
to be particles that are all around us and are passing through 
Earth and everything else at one-thousandth the speed of light, 
similar to the Earth’s speed orbiting the galaxy. Dark matter 
represents a bizarre shadow world of fundamental particles 
that are both omnipresent and largely imperceptible. In the 
coming decade, dark matter experiments will improve upon 
the sensitivities of current searches by several orders of mag-
nitude and together they are poised to reveal the identity of 
the dark matter. This discovery would transform the field of 
particle physics, advancing the understanding of the basic 
building blocks of the Universe.
There are many well-motivated ideas for what dark matter 
could be. These include weakly interacting massive particles 
(WIMPs), gravitinos, axions, sterile neutrinos, asymmetric dark 
matter, and hidden sector dark matter. The masses and inter -
action strengths of these candidates span many orders of mag-
nitude, and, of course, the dark matter could be composed of 
more than one type of particle. WIMPs, interacting through 
the exchange of particles with mass on the order of the weak 
scale, can experience thermal 4 freeze-out at densities within 
the correct order of magnitude to constitute the dark matter. 
This tantalizing possibility makes the WIMP an especially 
well-motivated dark matter candidate.
Although there is abundant evidence for the gravitational inter-
actions of dark matter from astronomical observations on a variety 
of length and time scales, no other interactions of dark matter 
have been conclusively detected, although there are some uncon-
firmed anomalies. Several different approaches are required to 
establish and corroborate a dark matter signal and to extrapolate 
from a discovery to understanding the properties of dark matter 
in the Universe. It is therefore imperative to search for dark matter 
in every feasible avenue. There are four known experimental 
approaches to carry out the search for dark matter: direct detec-
tion, indirect detection, particle colliders, and astrophysical evi-
dence of non-gravitational interactions.
Direct Detection
In direct detection experiments, physicists search for dark 
matter particles that routinely pass through, but occasionally 
interact with, ordinary matter. A confirmed direct detection 
signal would prove that dark matter particles exist and would 
provide information on their fundamental nature and interac-
tions, paving the way to understand the new physics known 
to be lurking beyond the Standard Model. Direct detection 
experiments are based on observation of elastic recoils of nuclei 
from WIMP collisions, or axion conversion in a magnetic field.
Weakly interacting, asymmetric, and hidden sector  
dark matter particles
These dark matter particles can occasionally interact with ordi-
nary matter, producing rare nuclear recoil events that can be 
detected using ultra-sensitive, low-background experiments. 
The U.S. program is positioned to make a major dark matter 
discovery. Over the past 30 years, the sensitivity of direct 
searches for DM-nucleon scattering has improved by over five 
orders of magnitude. This rate of progress is expected to continue 
and perhaps even accelerate over the next decade, presenting 
a tremendous opportunity for the discovery of dark matter inter-
action with ordinary matter. Many direct detection techniques 
were invented by U.S. groups, leading experiments have major 
U.S. participation, and more than 300 researchers in the U.S. 
are working on direct detection experiments. There is a wide 
range of direct detection technologies, and this field is a hotbed 
of technological innovation. Technologies with major U.S. par-
ticipation include: two-phase xenon; single- and two-phase argon; 
cryogenic germanium and silicon; bubble chambers; sodium 
iodide crystals; and directional time-projection chambers. The 
preeminent challenge in this field is the elimination of back -
grounds, with approaches including the use of low background 
materials, self-shielding, particle identification, and astrophysical 
rate modulation. A continued R&D effort will enable optimal 
sensitivity of future DM detection experiments over the full 
expected mass range and will develop techniques that can indi-
cate the direction of incoming dark matter particles.
Through the Snowmass process, a community consensus 
emerged on criteria for new DM direct searches: any new exper-
iment should either provide at least an order of magnitude 
improvement in cross section sensitivity for some range of DM 
 4In most WIMP models, pairs of dark matter particles are produced and annihilated in the hot early Universe in thermal equilibrium with ordinary matter. Those that 
survive annihilation “freeze out” and persist to the present day. WIMP candidates that annihilate to the correct relic density to be dark matter typically have average 
annihilation cross-section (multiplied by the relative velocity of the annihilating WIMPs) of < σv> = 3 x 10 -26 cm3 s-1.

=== PAGE 46 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 36
masses and interaction types, or demonstrate the capability 
to confirm or deny an indication of a DM signal from another 
experiment. Currently under review is a suite of Generation 2 
(G2) discovery experiments. These experiments should span 
a broad mass range (1 GeV to 100 TeV) and use multiple target 
materials to search the available spin-independent and spin-de-
pendent parameter space5 with an emphasis on cross-section 
reach and discovery potential, as well as the ability to confirm 
or refute the current anomalous results. Because there is sig -
nificant international competition, and a discovery could hap-
pen at any time, proceeding with the G2 experiments as quickly 
as possible is especially valuable. 
Following either a G2  discovery or further constraints, there 
should be at least one U.S.-led, internationally attractive 
Generation 3 (G3) direct detection experiment with maximal 
discovery potential. In addition, the U.S. should participate in 
other global advanced direct detection experiments at the G3 
scale. If no G3  discovery is made, DM searches will become 
limited by solar, atmospheric, and diffuse supernova neutrino 
coherent scattering backgrounds, so the goal of G3 experiments 
will be to explore DM parameter space comprehensively down 
to the limits set by neutrino backgrounds. This provides a 
well-defined target for this field over the next 20 years. 
Axions
The axion is another well-motivated candidate for the dark 
matter. Its existence would confirm a long-standing hypothesis 
that an additional symmetry in Nature is the reason that 
CP-violating terms are small in the strong interaction, and it 
also has the required properties to be the dark matter. The 
upcoming ADMX experiment is projected to be sensitive to 
axion masses up to 40 µeV. With continuing R&D, future exper-
iments should probe higher masses, within the allowed range 
available within astrophysical constraints. Data from cosmology 
will provide additional constraints on the axion parameter space 
in the region currently being probed by axion searches.
Indirect detection 
In many models, dark matter particles can interact with each 
other, converting their large rest mass into other particles, 
including gamma rays, neutrinos, and charged particles. Indirect 
detection of dark matter refers to searches of anomalous fluxes 
of these high-energy particles, which provide a unique test of 
the particle nature of dark matter, in situ in the cosmos. Indirect 
detection could discover or confirm a new particle and unam-
biguously identify it with dark matter. Large concentrations 
of dark matter have collected in gravitational wells including 
the inner galaxy and nearby dwarf galaxies, the latter of which 
have low astrophysical backgrounds. 
The rate from any of these sources depends on the annihilation 
cross section, which also governs the relic abundance of the 
dark matter. Therefore, there is a robust and well-defined target 
in all indirect detection experiments: the value of the cross 
section that leads to the observed dark matter abundance. 
Successful confirmation of an indirect detection signal would 
open up a program of fundamental measurements of the prop-
erties of the dark matter particle(s), including masses and 
branching ratios. Relevant limits on the annihilation of dark 
matter particles into photons, electrons, and antiprotons have 
been obtained from the PAMELA, AMS, and Fermi satellites, 
and from the VERITAS and H.E.S.S. ground-based experiments. 
Although excess positrons have been detected, the constraints 
from gamma rays have already ruled out the most straightfor-
ward dark matter interpretation of this excess. Future exper -
iments sensitive to antideuteron fluxes at low energies may 
provide incisive tests of some WIMP dark matter candidates.
The next major step for the indirect dark matter program will be 
to search for dark matter using the Cherenkov Telescope Array 
(CTA). CTA will search for dark matter in both the inner Galaxy 
and in dwarf galaxies. U.S. groups in CTA are developing inno-
vative dual-mirror technology with the goal of providing superior 
event reconstruction, background rejection, and resolution of 
astrophysical point sources to distinguish them from diffuse 
emission and dark matter signals. CTA will have sufficient sen-
sitivity to reach the WIMP thermal annihilation cross section up 
to WIMP masses of ~10 TeV, assuming conventional dark matter 
halo profiles. Strong U.S. participation in CTA would enable such 
sensitivity with significantly shorter observing time, continuing 
a leading U.S. program of indirect dark matter searches. 
The IceCube, Super-Kamiokande, and PINGU experiments can 
detect the neutrinos produced by dark matter annihilation. 
WIMPs trapped in the sun annihilate, producing high-energy  
 5In the non-relativistic limit, WIMP-nucleon couplings are usefully classified as “spin-dependent” when the scattering rate depends on the DM particle’s spin, or “spin 
independent” when the DM particle’s spin does not affect the rate.

=== PAGE 47 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 37
neutrinos, an unambiguous signal with no astrophysical back-
grounds. PINGU is projected to be sensitive to spin-dependent 
WIMP-proton interactions at dark matter masses as low as 5 
GeV. The sensitivity of PINGU to low WIMP masses is inter -
esting since this region is intrinsically difficult to probe with 
current direct detection experiments. Using IceCube as a veto 
for incoming tracks, PINGU can view the galactic center more 
efficiently than before, greatly improving the sensitivity to 
dark matter in that important region of the sky. 
Sterile neutrino dark matter can decay to Standard Model neu-
trinos plus a mono-energetic x-ray photon that may be detected 
with x-ray telescopes. Ideal places to look are nearby galaxies 
or clusters of galaxies. 
Accelerators
Dark matter can be produced directly in high-energy colliders, 
providing the opportunity to discover and study its properties in 
a controlled laboratory environment. The detection of dark matter 
production relies on the signature of “missing energy,” an observed 
imbalance of energy and momentum, and can be classified by the 
visible particles that are produced in association. Collider searches 
for such direct production are typically sensitive to low-mass dark 
matter due to the large production rate. In some scenarios, the 
LHC can provide the strongest WIMP search reach for dark matter 
up to roughly 25 GeV, and this sensitivity can be extended to a few 
hundred GeV at the HL-LHC for specialized models. The LHC best 
probes dark matter candidates that have couplings to quarks, while 
the ILC mainly probes dark matter candidates with leptonic cou-
plings. In addition, many theories beyond the Standard Model 
predict a spectrum of new particles, with large production rates, 
that subsequently decay into dark matter particles. This provides 
an additional avenue to search for dark matter at colliders, extend-
ing the sensitivity to WIMP masses up to the TeV scale at the LHC.
It is possible that the Higgs boson interacts with dark matter 
particles and may generate a fraction of their mass. Collider 
searches for “invisible” decays of the Higgs boson, which are 
detected by missing energy signatures, are of the utmost impor-
tance to exploit this potential window into the dark sector. The 
HL-LHC has sensitivity to such decays at the 10% level, and the 
ILC extends this reach to the sub-percent level, providing a crucial 
probe of mass generation in the dark sector.
The dark matter may be composed of ultra-light (less than a 
GeV), very weakly interacting particles. Searches for such states 
can be carried out with high-intensity, low-energy beams avail-
able at Jefferson Lab or with neutrino beams aimed at large 
underground detectors. 
Astrophysical probes 
Although models of cold, collisionless dark matter agree well 
with cosmological observations, these models may break down 
at galactic or smaller scales. Simulations of dark matter structure 
formation suggest that the density in the inner cores of galaxies 
should be much higher than is currently observed. These sim-
ulations also predict the existence of many small subhalos, which 
could be identified with small galaxies orbiting the Milky Way; 
again the predictions for the number of satellites deviate from 
the observed number. It is possible that astrophysical effects 
explain these small-scale problems, but it is also possible that 
they are pointing to interesting properties of the dark matter 
particles. For example, dark matter with additional self-inter -
actions (such as through heavy photon exchange) can give the 
same large-scale behavior as collisionless dark matter but dif-
ferent behavior at small scales. Warm dark matter, with mass 
~1 keV, can suppress structure formation at small length scales 
compared to cold dark matter. Optical surveys (such as DES, 
LSST, and DESI) may be used to address these issues.
Goals and Timeframes 
• Probe dark matter interactions with ordinary matter over a 
range of dark matter masses and interaction types, with large 
and important discovery reach (2015–2024).
• If dark matter-ordinary matter interactions are discovered, mea-
sure the dark matter particle mass and all properties of its inter-
actions with an ambitious international effort. Otherwise, continue 
to probe lower cross sections down to the background limits due 
to neutrino-nucleon coherent scattering (2021–2030).
• Perform indirect searches for dark matter annihilation in the 
Sun, galactic center, and dwarf galaxies (2018–2028). 
• Search for dark matter production in high-energy colliders 
over a broad range of masses and cross sections (2015–2035).
• Elucidate the nature of dark matter interactions using cosmic 
surveys (2016–2025).

=== PAGE 48 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 38


=== PAGE 49 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 39
3.4: Understand Cosmic Acceleration:  
Dark Energy and Inflation
The light from distant objects arrives at Earth after long travel 
times, so we observe objects as they were long ago. Observations 
of deep space, therefore, enable the study of the Universe when 
it was very young. At early times, the typical energies of particles 
were much higher than today. For example, the energies of the 
particles when the Universe was a trillionth of a second old were 
comparable to those of the ultra-high energy particles produced 
at the LHC. Armed with the dual tools of telescopes that peer 
back in time and high-energy accelerators that study the ele -
mentary particles and their interactions, scientists have pieced 
together a deeper understanding of the origin and evolution of 
the Universe. An important part of this story is the existence of 
two periods during which the expansion of the Universe accel-
erated, a phenomenon that requires new physics. That under-
standing can now be used to learn about the new physics respon-
sible for the apparent early epoch of acceleration, inflation, and 
the latest epoch, driven presumably by dark energy. 
The key questions surrounding dark energy and inflation 
include: What is driving the accelerated expansion of the 
Universe today? Is it caused by the energy in the vacuum, the 
so-called cosmological constant? If so, why is the value of the 
cosmological constant, which is but one form of dark energy, 
so small? Is cosmic acceleration driven by a different type of 
dark energy that evolves with time, or is it due to a modification 
of Einstein’s theory of gravity, general relativity? What drove 
the apparent accelerated expansion during the inflationary 
epoch at ultra-high energies? 
Observing three fundamental characteristics of the Universe 
—expansion history, structure, and the nature of the primordial 
ripples—will help answer these questions. The properties of 
the dark energy driving the current phase of acceleration can 
be determined by measuring the expansion history of the 
Universe. This history is inferred from the brightness of distant 
supernovae and from a distinctive pattern in the way galaxies 
are distributed in space, the so-called Baryon Acoustic 
Oscillation (BAO) signature.
Matter is not distributed uniformly in the Universe: like the  
population of the United States, it has formed patterns, called 
structure. How this structure grows over time and space is the 
second key characteristic. Measurements of structure can dis-
tinguish two competing explanations for the current cosmic 
acceleration: dark energy and modified gravity. The two expla-
nations can be tailored to produce identical expansion histories, 
but they predict different growth of structure in time and dis-
tance. Three measurements from which the structure can be 
inferred are (i) gravitational lensing—the distortions in the 
observed shapes of galaxies due to the bending of light by 
(mostly dark) matter between us and the galaxies; (ii) galaxy 
cluster abundance—how the number of very large objects 
changes over time; and (iii) Redshift Space Distortions (RSD)—
the velocities of galaxies near over-dense regions. 
To learn about the physics of inflation, the structure in the 
Universe today must be studied to uncover the nature of the 
first ripples from which this structure emerged. These primordial 
ripples—in both the density and in space-time via gravitational 
waves—were caused by quantum mechanical fluctuations during 
inflation and therefore provide information about the physics 
that drove that early epoch of acceleration. This third charac-
teristic can be probed by measuring structure in galaxy surveys 
and, even more cleanly, by measuring specific properties of the 
Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB). Indeed, the amplitude 
of the primordial gravitational wave signal may have been mea-
sured by the BICEP2  experiment and, if confirmed, sets the 
energy scale of inflation to be 2x1016 GeV. 
Goals and Timeframes 
• Measure the parameters that characterize dark energy to 5% 
precision (2020) and then improve to 1% (2025) over the entire 
history from the decelerating epoch to accelerating epoch.
• Distinguish dark energy from modified gravity as an expla-
nation of the current epoch of acceleration by measuring struc-
ture to 10% (2020), ultimately reaching percent precision over 
a wide range of distance scales and times (2030).
• Confirm or refute the BICEP2 detection of primordial grav -
itational waves from inflation (2015–17). Depending on the out-
come, either measure the amplitude of this signal to the per -
cent level or constrain the spectrum to sub-percent accuracy 
to distinguish between models of inflation (2025 ).

=== PAGE 50 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 40
Opportunities
The current Dark Energy Survey (DES), eBOSS, and Stage-3 
CMB experiments will begin delivering results by the end of 
the decade. Then the next generation of experiments, together 
with complementary efforts in Europe and Asia, will push the 
techniques to their limits. 
 
The Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI) can provide 
very accurate distances to 25 million galaxies and quasars. The 
expansion history constraints from DESI BAO can be measured 
at the percent level, looking back over ten billion years. DESI 
can also measure RSD, providing a unique view of structure 
growth over time.
The Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) will precisely measure 
the positions and shapes of four billion galaxies along with esti-
mates of their distances (using photometric redshifts), 100,000 
massive galaxy clusters, and 250,000 Type Ia Supernovae, pro-
viding an order-of-magnitude improvement relative to cur -
rent-generation experiments with stucture measurements com-
plementing the precise expansion history from DESI. The huge 
amount of information from LSST will enable detailed tests of 
the standard cosmological paradigm (cosmological constant and 
cold dark matter) over a wide range of time and space.
Together DESI and LSST can attack the question of what is 
driving cosmic acceleration with multiple observations that 
measure both expansion history and growth of structure. The 
precise expansion history measurements from DESI will leave 
competing models little freedom when confronting the mea -
sured structure of the Universe. By 2030, physicists may well 
have a definitive answer to the question of whether the current 
epoch of acceleration is driven by a new substance (dark 
energy) or by a new theory of space and time (a modification 
to general relativity).
Both surveys can also tighten current constraints on the shape 
of the primordial density spectrum generated during inflation. 
The shape is quantified with a slope, and these surveys will 
increase the accuracy on the slope by a factor of five or more. 
A Stage 4 Cosmic Microwave Background experiment (CMB-S4) 
aims at measuring the amplitude of the gravitational waves 
produced during inflation with percent level precision. Together 
with the galaxy surveys’ improved constraints on the shape of 
the density spectrum, CMB-S4  will constrain the ultra-high 
energy physics responsible for inflation. 
These opportunities also address another key Driver, as all 
three projects will constrain the sum of the neutrino masses. 
CMB-S4, armed with the expansion history from DESI, projects 
to detect the tiny effect of neutrino masses in the cosmos with 
an uncertainty in the sum of the neutrino masses that is less 
than a third of the minimum value determined from laboratory 
measurements of neutrino properties. DESI alone can reach 
comparable limits depending on systematics with a completely 
different approach. CMB-S4 will also constrain the number of 
relativistic degrees of freedom, which can be altered if light 
sterile neutrinos or other new particles are produced in the 
early Universe. 
Conversely, a comprehensive neutrino program that identifies 
an ultra-high energy scale as the source of neutrino mass will 
complement the cosmic probes of these scales. Searches for 
proton decay are also sensitive to physics at very high energies 
and will provide clues about theories that unify the electro -
magnetic, weak and strong forces. Together with information 
about inflation gleaned from CMB-S4 , DESI, and LSST, these 
measurements offer the hope of piecing together a picture of 
physics at energies more than a trillion times larger than those 
probed directly at the LHC.
Candidates for the Small Projects Portfolio can dramatically 
leverage investments in DESI and LSST. With Integral Field 
Spectrographs, the large samples of both nearby and distant 
supernovae found by, e.g., DES and LSST can be studied in detail 
to make supernova-based measurements as precise as the 
complementary DESI BAO measurements. With focused spec-
troscopic follow-up of the LSST galaxies, the galaxy-based 
measurements from LSST can be calibrated much more pre -
cisely. Proposals to develop novel Microwave Kinetic Inductance 
Detectors would allow the billions of galaxies found by LSST 
to be used for wider field/lower resolution RSD. Novel probes 
to search for the new force introduced by explanations of accel-
eration that modify Einstein’s theory of gravity were identified 
at Snowmass.

=== PAGE 51 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 41
The Future
Confounding expectations, cosmic surveys have repeatedly 
uncovered evidence for new physics, although to date having 
mapped only a small fraction of the Universe. The upcoming 
generation will constrain this physics in ways described above, 
but it also may well continue to produce the physics surprises 
that have appeared with almost every new generation of cos-
mology experiments. If so, we can anticipate the new physics 
serving as the focus of the ensuing suite of cosmic experiments 
well beyond 2030.

=== PAGE 52 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 42


=== PAGE 53 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 43
3.5: Explore the Unknown: New Particles, 
Interactions, and Physical Principles
In addition to the specific new phenomena in the other four 
Drivers, there are other clear indicators of physics beyond the 
Standard Model. The matter-antimatter asymmetry of the 
Universe is not explained by the measured CP-violating phase 
in the weak interactions of quarks. Furthermore, as previously 
mentioned, the relatively low value of the Higgs mass and the 
perplexing value of the dark energy density are strong hints 
that new physics awaits discovery. 
It is important that we employ a broad-based strategy to search 
for new particles and interactions. In the next subsections we 
outline the most promising opportunities to reveal new physics 
using complementary approaches: High Energy Colliders, 
Precision Physics and Rare Processes, Cosmic Particles, and 
Low-mass Particles. In addition we comment on the roadmap 
towards the future. It is most important to remember that these 
experiments explore the unknown, and surprises are likely.
High Energy Colliders
The discovery of the Higgs boson at the LHC has opened a new 
era for particle physics at high energy. Its couplings to the W 
and Z boson are Standard Model-like, confirming that it is 
responsible for giving mass to these particles. Measurements 
of the angular distributions of its decay products indicate its 
scalar nature. The prediction of the existence of the Higgs 
boson is a triumph of the Standard Model, and its experimental 
observation a remarkable accomplishment of the high energy 
physics community. 
However, the smallness (for example, compared to the Planck 
mass) of the Higgs boson mass suggests that there must be new 
particles and interactions that can be discovered at very high-
energy colliders like the LHC that explore the TeV energy scale. 
The most studied extension of the Standard Model that explains 
the smallness of the Higgs boson mass relies on the existence 
of a new space-time symmetry called Supersymmetry. If 
Supersymmetry explains the smallness of the mass of the Higgs 
boson then it implies that there are many new particles (called 
superpartners) that can be observed in high-energy colliders.
Stable weakly interacting massive particles (WIMPs) typically 
have the right thermal-relic abundance to compose the  
dark matter. Extensions of the Standard Model, such as 
Supersymmetry, that explain the smallness of the Higgs boson 
mass often have a WIMP dark matter candidate. At the LHC, 
missing energy signatures can be used to search for the particle 
that makes up the dark matter, and in particular WIMPs. 
The top quark couples much more strongly to the Higgs particle 
than do the other quarks and leptons. This may indicate a spe-
cial role for the top quark and makes it very important to study 
its interactions more precisely at high-energy colliders, for 
example, through searches for exotic decays.
Direct access to new particles and new interactions is a crucial 
component of a comprehensive program to explore the unknown 
forces and particles of nature. In the near term, the LHC upgrade 
to higher luminosity is critical to continued exploration of the 
physics associated with the TeV energy scale. Beyond the 
HL-LHC, a 100 TeV hadron collider (VLHC) could discover and 
study new particles and their interactions up to an energy scale 
of about 50  TeV. It would also allow complete elucidation of 
the Electroweak Symmetry Breaking mechanism. 
The ILC is a 500 GeV e+e– linear collider (upgradable to 1 TeV) 
that will complement the LHC program. It can discover new 
weakly interacting particles that may escape detection at the 
LHC. The cleaner environment can also allow more precise 
measurement of the interactions of Standard Model particles 
and of new particles. A multi-TeV scale e +e– collider would 
extend the reach of this program to higher energies. 
Precision Physics and Rare Processes
High precision and rare decay experiments often do not require 
the highest energy accelerators but instead rely on very intense 
beams to produce large numbers of particles that can be studied 
with great precision. This provides unique sensitivity to physics 
at energy scales far higher than can be accessed directly at 
colliders. Proposed extensions of the Standard Model, e.g. , 
Supersymmetry, extra spatial dimensions, or further unification 
of forces not only relate parts of the Standard Model but also 
predict new particles and interactions whose effects may be 
seen in precision measurements and in rates of rare processes. 

=== PAGE 54 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 44
Such experiments therefore have an opportunistic component, 
based on what can be measured and clearly interpreted, and 
are performed at a variety of facilities. They include:
• Heavy quarks and τ leptons: The study of decays of hadrons 
containing a heavy quark (charm, bottom) and decays of the 
τlepton at Belle II and LHCb will provide more precise tests 
of the validity of Standard Model predictions (including the 
possible sources of CP non-conservation), increasing the sen-
sitivity to the mass scale of new physics by dramatically increas-
ing the sample of such decays by roughly two orders of 
magnitude.
• Rare Kaon decays: The cleanliness of the Standard Model 
prediction of the branching ratios for the rare kaon decays 
K+ → π+νννand KL → π0νν make them an especially attractive 
place to search for new physics. The CERN NA62  experiment 
plans to increase the existing sample of K+ → π+νν by at least 
an order of magnitude, and further improvement could be made 
by the Fermilab experiment ORKA. The KOTO experiment at 
J-PARC in Japan aims for first observation of the CP-violating 
decay KL → π 0νν.
• Rare Muon decays and processes: Observation of charged lepton 
flavor violation (e.g., a muon changing to an electron) would be 
a signature of new physics. In the muon sector, a dramatic order 
of magnitude increase in sensitivity to the scale of such new 
physics should come from experiments on the decays µ→eγ, 
µ→ee+e–, and muon conversion to an electron in the presence 
of a nucleus. These experiments will be performed at J-PARC, 
PSI, and Fermilab. 
Of these three processes, muon conversion to an electron in 
the presence of a nucleus will give the greatest increase in mass 
reach for new physics. Very ambitious next-generation exper-
iments aim to be sensitive to conversion rates four orders of 
magnitude beyond the existing bounds, allowing them to reveal 
the presence of new particles with masses up to thousands of 
TeV, well beyond the reach of the LHC. Worldwide, there are 
two planned muon-to-electron conversion experiments: COMET 
at J-PARC and Mu2e at Fermilab. Phase I of COMET is designed 
to achieve a 3x10-15 single-event sensitivity. Phase II of COMET, 
not yet approved, and Mu2e plan to improve this sensitivity by 
two more orders of magnitude in a similar time frame.
• Muon magnetic moment: The prediction for the anomalous 
magnetic moment, g-2, of the muon differs from its measured 
value by three-and-a-half standard deviations. A new experi-
ment, Muon g-2  at Fermilab, will significantly improve the 
accuracy of the measurement, and combining this with further 
improvements in the theoretical prediction for it may sharpen 
this discrepancy and point the way to new physics. A different 
approach to measuring g-2 , using ultra cold muons, has been 
proposed at J-PARC.
• Baryon number violation: Most of the mass of ordinary matter 
lies in the nucleus of atoms, which are composed of protons 
and neutrons (baryons). After several decades of challenging 
experiments, stringent limits have been placed on the proton 
lifetime, showing it to be much longer than the age of the 
Universe. In fact, for some decay modes the limit on the lifetime 
is so strong that a single proton decay of that type would not 
be expected to occur in a gallon of water even after waiting a 
million years. Still, many extensions to the Standard Model 
predict an unstable proton. Notable among these are the mod-
els that unify the strong, weak, and electromagnetic interac -
tions—in supersymmetric extensions of the Standard Model 
this unification occurs at an energy scale around 1016 GeV. The 
search for proton decay is an avenue to probe this ultra-high 
energy physics scale. Cosmic surveys that search for distortions 
of the microwave background also probe physics at this same 
energy scale. Large underground detectors built for the study 
of neutrino oscillations and measurements of supernova neu-
trinos can simultaneously be used to search for proton decay. 
The search for proton decay is part of the planned program for 
the neutrino experiments Hyper-Kamiokande and LBNF. They 
offer the opportunity over the next 20 years to increase the 
sensitivity to proton decay by an order of magnitude.
Baryon number violation by two units may be related to 
Majorana neutrino masses, which violate lepton number con-
servation by two units. The NNbarX experiment proposes to 
search for neutron-antineutron oscillations to increase the 
sensitivity to this process by three orders of magnitude.
• Electric dipole moments: Besides the phase in the weak inter-
actions of quarks, potential sources of CP non-conservation 
include the strong CP phase θQCD, and the phase(s) in the weak 

=== PAGE 55 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 45
interactions of neutrinos. Many extensions of the Standard 
Model, including Supersymmetry, have additional sources of CP 
non-conservation. Among the most powerful probes of new 
physics that does not conserve CP are the electric dipole 
moments (edm’s) of the neutron, electron and proton. Searches 
for the edm’s of neutrons and electrons are already sensitive to 
contributions from new particle masses at the 10–100 TeV scale, 
with substantial improvements in reach expected over the next 
decade. A new direct neutron edm experiment is planned at Oak 
Ridge National Laboratory. At Fermilab, a direct measurement 
of the electric dipole moment of the proton, with sensitivity 
three orders of magnitude better than the present limit, may 
be possible. The experiment would be sensitive to contributions 
from new particles with masses well in excess of 100 TeV.
Looking farther into the future, progress in precision physics 
and rare processes will be shaped partly by what particle phys-
icists learn in the coming decade. Upgrades to the accelerator 
complex at Fermilab (PIP-II and additional improvements) will 
offer opportunities to further this program. For example, com-
bined with modest upgrades to Mu2 e, improvements in the 
Fermilab accelerator complex potentially could provide 
increased sensitivity (by a factor of ten) to muon-to-electron 
conversion and allow one to search for this very rare process 
in different nuclei. This will provide crucial clues on the nature 
of the new physics revealed in the event of an observation in 
the next-generation experiments. 
Cosmic Particles
A suite of experiments is observing extra-terrestrial gamma rays, 
neutrinos, and cosmic rays produced by cosmic accelerators. 
Interestingly, their sources have not all been identified, and how 
they accelerate particles to the very large energies observed is 
still a matter of debate. Although delivering the highest energy 
photons (tens of TeV), neutrinos (>103 TeV), and hadrons (>108 
TeV), the main scientific interest in these experiments is currently 
more astrophysics than particle physics because no new particle 
physics is required to explain them.
There is a set of cosmic-particles projects, however, that are of 
clear significance for particle physics: the searches for ultra-high 
energy cosmic neutrinos. A new generation of radio detection 
experiments is under development to detect ultra-high-energy 
neutrinos with energies up to 107 TeV. Using directional infor-
mation these experiments will be able to determine the inter-
action strengths of neutrinos at center of mass collision ener-
gies around 10 TeV, probing a new regime of weak interaction 
physics at energies inaccessible to current or planned future 
colliders. Leading tests of fundamental physical principles have 
been performed by neutrino and gamma-ray experiments. 
Cosmic particle detectors, including CTA, PINGU, and General 
Antiparticle Spectrometer (GAPS), also have sensitivity to 
indirect dark matter signals. 
Low-mass Particles
Current data still allow the existence of new, light particles 
that couple only very weakly to ordinary matter. These “hidden 
sector” possibilities include axions, axion-like particles, hid-
den-sector photons, millicharged particles, and other exotica, 
some of which have independent physical motivations. 
Significant regions of physically viable parameter space for 
many of these particles can be searched with relatively mod -
est-scale experiments. For example, “dark photons” (new gauge 
bosons that have small “kinetic mixing” with photons, resulting 
in very weak interactions with charged particles) will have 
distinctive kinematic signatures in high-intensity electron beam 
dump experiments at Jefferson Lab and can also be searched 
for in accelerator-based neutrino experiments.

=== PAGE 56 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 46
3.6: Enabling R&D and Computing
Accelerators that provide the required particle beams, instru-
mentation that reveals the particle interactions, and computing 
that supports both the machines and the physics experiments, 
lie at the foundation of particle physics. These areas—accel -
erators, instrumentation, and computing—together with the 
theoretical predictions, enable research and connect particle 
physics with other fields of science and with society. To address 
the science Drivers, increasing demands for higher performance 
at lower cost are being placed on all three areas. This necessi-
tates the ongoing pursuit of innovation. 
 
Innovation relies on continued long-range investments in basic 
R&D and in the training of students and postdocs. These require, 
among other things, state-of-the-art facilities at the national 
laboratories and universities, support for researchers to use 
them effectively, and the creation of opportunities that attract 
young talent. 
 
Accelerator Research
The future of particle physics depends critically on transfor -
mational accelerator R&D to enable new capabilities and to 
advance existing technologies at lower cost. The program is 
driven by the physics goals, but future physics opportunities 
will be determined by what is made possible. Currently, the 
U.S. has a world-leading program in the critical technologies 
of superconducting radio frequency (SCRF) cavities, supercon-
ducting magnets, and high-power targets, which are required 
for the next generation of accelerators. The U.S. has unique 
facilities and has made great progress in the development of 
advanced accelerators thanks to strategic investments at 
national laboratories and several universities.
 
The DOE office of High Energy Physics (HEP) sponsors both 
the General Accelerator R&D (GARD) program and more 
directed R&D aimed at a specific accelerator or technology. 
The GARD program ranges from accelerator theory and com -
putation to advanced technology development, including high-
field and high-temperature superconductors, SCRF, and novel 
acceleration ultra-high gradient techniques. GARD tends to 
support relatively small university and laboratory efforts and 
larger lab-based projects of a scale of $10M. Both GARD and  
the projects have time horizons ranging from almost immediate 
(e.g., LHC Accelerator Research Program [LARP], which provides 
essential R&D for the current LHC and for the HL-LHC) to 
efforts with scales longer than an individual career. GARD pro-
grams typically have broad applicability, including light sources, 
nuclear physics, and medical and industrial accelerators. 
Recently, a DOE Stewardship program was formed specifically 
to support topics with broad applicability.
 
Universities play a unique role in advancing accelerator science. 
NSF has recently launched a program in accelerator science “to 
seed and support fundamental accelerator science at universities 
as an academic discipline… [and to support the] training of the 
next generation of accelerator scientists, including students, 
postdoctoral researchers, and junior faculty, who will lead inno-
vations in the field and will form the backbone of the nation’s 
highly trained accelerator workforce.” This program enables 
universities to advance accelerator science and technology by 
leveraging their multidisciplinary expertise and infrastructure.
 
Together the GARD, Stewardship, and NSF programs form the 
critical basis for accelerator R&D, enabling particle physics and 
many other fields. All of these programs provide essential 
training for accelerator physicists and engineers. Given the 
substantive investments in such programs overseas, appropriate 
investments should be made in the U.S. to ensure a continued 
competitiveness by offering opportunities that attract and 
retain the very best and that enable development of critical 
technology. Historically, operation of high energy physics facil-
ities provided research and training opportunities in accelerator 
science. With the termination or repurposing of these facilities, 
ensuring access to accelerator test facilities will help maintain 
the knowledge base and advance the field.
 
General Accelerator R&D programs
The GARD and Stewardship programs enable a comprehensive 
set of efforts supporting current operating accelerators, devel-
oping well-understood technologies for mid-term accelerators, 
and creating novel acceleration concepts. For example, GARD 
thrusts in normal and superconducting RF acceleration are 
relevant to the Linac Coherent Light Source II (LCLS-II), PIP-II, 
ILC and other industrial and medical accelerators, while the 
unique position that the U.S. holds in high field superconducting 

=== PAGE 57 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 47
magnets supports the HL-LHC upgrade and future pp colliders. 
High power targets, as noted at Snowmass, will address critical 
needs and should be included in GARD. HEP also supports test 
facilities and projects that conduct work more focused on par-
ticular future accelerators.
 
There is a critical need for technical breakthroughs that will yield 
more cost-effective accelerators. For example, ultrahigh gradient 
accelerator techniques will require the development of power 
sources (RF, lasers, and electron beam drivers) compatible with 
high average power and high wall plug efficiency, and acceler-
ating structures (plasmas, metallic, and dielectric) that can sus-
tain high average power, have high damage threshold, and can 
be cascaded. Engagement of the national laboratories, univer-
sities, and industry will be essential for comprehensive R&D to 
meet these challenges. Advancing these technologies will benefit 
many other areas of science and technology.
 
The effectiveness of the HEP programs can be improved by 
strengthening and making more explicit the linkages between 
the GARD programs and specific transformative outcomes. 
When applicable, justifications for research directions should 
include, and be evaluated on, specific target applications rel-
evant to HEP (including high-level accelerator parameters) 
through a coordinated national and international effort. GARD 
contains several core competencies and critical efforts that 
match the spirit of the Stewardship program and could be pur-
sued through that program or other sources.
 
Directed Accelerator R&D
The U.S. LHC Accelerator Research Program (LARP) funds R&D 
aimed at the LHC, with activities principally at FNAL, BNL, 
LBNL, and SLAC. LARP includes SC magnet R&D, a variety of 
beam physics activities, and the Toohig Fellowhip program. 
Most LARP research is currently aimed at the HL-LHC upgrade 
and includes Nb 3Sn low-beta interaction quadrupoles, crab 
cavities, and a high bandwidth feedback system.
 
The Proton Improvement Plan-II (PIP-II) will increase Fermilab’s 
capabilities to deliver 1.2  MW average beam power to the  
Long-Baseline Neutrino Facility production target, simulta-
neously establishing a platform for subsequent upgrades to 
multi-MW capability. The central PIP-II element is a new 800  
MeV superconducting linac operated at low duty factor but 
constructed to be capable of continuous operation. Upgrades 
to a number of systems in the Booster, Recycler, and Main 
Injector will also be required. Power upgrades beyond those 
envisioned for PIP-II will require R&D for high average power 
proton linacs and target systems. 
 
It is appropriate for the PIP-II effort to be supported partially 
by temporary redirection of GARD funding of SCRF R&D and 
facilities at Fermilab.
 
FACET-II would be an upgrade to the SLAC user test facility 
FACET for beam-driven plasma-based wakefield acceleration 
of electrons—and, uniquely, positrons—that has attracted pro-
posals from more than 50  users from across the accelerator 
community. BELLA-II would be a demonstrator facility at LBNL 
for high average power operation of laser and laser plasma 
accelerator technology in the kW-class at kHz repetition rate.
 
The Muon Accelerator Program (MAP) currently aims at tech-
nology feasibility studies for far-term muon storage rings for 
neutrino factories and for muon colliders, including the Muon 
Ionization Cooling Experiment (MICE) at the Rutherford 
Appleton Laboratory. The large value of sin2(2θ13) extends the 
time frame for when neutrino factories might be needed, and 
the small Higgs mass with positive implications for its study 
at more technically ready e+e– colliders reduces the near-term 
necessity of muon colliders.
 
The U.S. has played a leadership role in the design and construc-
tion of novel advanced technological systems for the International 
Linear Collider (ILC). While high-level discussions between the 
U.S., Japan, and global partners are unfolding, pre-project funding 
would help convert the Technical Design Report (TDR) to a 
site-specific design incorporating design improvements and will 
enable re-engagement of the U.S. community.
 
Far-term Future-Generation Accelerators
The motivation for future-generation accelerators must be the 
science Drivers. The aforementioned R&D efforts are required 
to establish the technical feasibility and to make the costs 
practical. The future-generation accelerators are discussed in 
Section 2.

=== PAGE 58 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 48
Instrumentation R&D
The particle physics detector community has historically been 
an important contributor to broadly applicable innovation in 
instrumentation. A recent example is the key role of ultra-sen-
sitive transition edge bolometers in CMB experiments. A rich 
spectrum of challenging physics experiments is planned that 
requires advances in instrumentation, with increasing require-
ments on sensitivity and performance. It is only through invest-
ments in the development of advanced, cost-effective new 
technologies that science goals can be met. With the recom-
mended increase in new project construction (Recommendation 
5), detector R&D activity will shift toward addressing the rel-
atively near-term requirements of the LHC detectors and the 
neutrino program. This shift will enable these projects to realize 
their physics program in a cost-constrained environment. For 
the longer term, a portfolio balanced between incremental 
and transformational R&D is required. 
Computing
Computing cuts across all activities in particle physics, and 
these activities spur innovation in computing. The field played 
leading roles in developing and using high-throughput and 
distributed/grid computing, online (real-time and near-real-
time) data processing, high-performance computing, high-per-
formance networking, large-scale data storage, large-scale data 
management and analysis, and the World Wide Web. Particle 
physics projects successfully manage software development 
and operations on a global scale.
Computing in particle physics continues to evolve based on 
needs and opportunities. For example, the use of high-perfor-
mance computing, combined with new algorithms, is advancing 
full 3-D simulations at realistic beam intensities of nearly all 
types of accelerators. This will enable “virtual prototyping” of 
accelerator components on a larger scale than is currently 
possible. The physics data from the LHC experiments stresses 
both computing infrastructure and expertise, and the LHC 
operations in the next decades will likely result in order-of-mag-
nitude increases in data volume and analysis complexity. 
Experiments exploring the cosmos will greatly extend their 
data needs as vast new surveys and high-throughput instru-
ments come on line. Cosmological computing is making sig -
nificant progress in connecting fundamental physics with the  
structure and evolution of the Universe at the necessary level 
of detail. Theory computations will continue to increase in 
importance, as higher fidelity modeling will be required to 
understand the data.

=== PAGE 59 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 49
Benefits and Broader Impacts 4

=== PAGE 60 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 50
Particle physics shares with other basic sciences the need to 
innovate, invent, and develop technologies to carry out its mis-
sion to explore the nature of matter, energy, space and time. 
Advanced particle accelerators, cutting-edge particle detectors, 
and sophisticated computing techniques are the hallmarks of 
particle physics research. This dedicated research has benefited 
tremendously from progress in other areas of science to advance 
the current state of technology for particle physics. In return, 
developments within the particle physics community have 
enabled basic scientific research and applications in numerous 
other areas.6 This broad, connected scientific enterprise provides 
tremendous benefits to society as a whole.
The particle physics effort to advance knowledge is most sig -
nificantly exemplified by the drive for sophisticated accelerator 
technology to create state-of-the-art high-energy particle 
beams and their associated experiments. Beyond advancing 
the technology for particle physics, this dedicated research 
and development has enabled basic scientific research and 
applications in areas beyond high-energy physics, including 
materials science, medical imaging and therapy, and national 
security. New facilities, such as advanced light sources, are 
enabled because of the decades of development by particle 
physics. Some technologies advanced by particle physics have 
opened up commercial markets that now play a significant role 
in the U.S. economy and fabric of life.
The web of connections between the tools and techniques of 
particle physics, other fields of science, industry, and society 
is extensive. Particle physics’ role in the creation of the World 
Wide Web has been called out in a report from the President’s 
Council of Advisors on Science & Technology (PCAST). The 
development of distributed “grid” computing technology is a 
response to the need for increased data analysis power that 
can be made available by accessing remote computer instal-
lations in widely dispersed institutes. By launching grids in 
Europe and the U.S. to support the LHC, particle physics demon-
strated the capability to unite globally distributed computing 
resources into a single coordinated computing service. These 
grids are now used by a wide spectrum of sciences ranging 
from archeology and astronomy to computational chemistry 
and materials science. 
The particle physics and nuclear physics communities studying 
quantum chromodynamics using numerical lattice algorithms 
have been avid users of advanced computing platforms and 
major drivers and contributors to early developments in the 
supercomputing industry. Their connections with advanced 
computing continue today with collaborations of both particle 
and nuclear physics researchers with industry. Sophisticated 
simulation packages developed by the particle physics com-
munity are being used in many areas, including radiation ther-
apy, medical imaging, nuclear physics, accelerator modeling, 
materials science, and aerospace.
Theoretical and mathematical techniques developed in particle 
physics have found applications in other scientific fields, and 
vice versa, most notably those that employ similar mathematical 
language and focus on quantum mechanics, quantum field 
theory, and renormalization group flows. Those research fields, 
including atomic, molecular and optical physics, astrophysics, 
condensed matter physics, nuclear physics, and quantum 
information science, enjoy a particularly close relation with 
particle theory. Condensed matter physics, for example, intrin-
sically involves physical lattices and exhibits a rich variety of 
non-perturbative phenomena, whose properties are often 
controlled by gauge symmetries. Science has been enriched 
through the exchange of theoretical advances and computa-
tional techniques between particle physics theory and con -
nected disciplines. 7
Instrumentation developed to enable particle physics experi-
ments has sometimes been enthusiastically adopted in other 
fields. For example, semiconductor based charged particle  
track detection technology from collider experiments has 
become a key tool at synchrotron radiation and FEL facilities; 
new crystal growth methods developed for particle detectors 
later found use in a large commercial market for these crystals 
in medical imaging; and the application of core particle physics 
techniques led to the discovery of new retinal functions of the 
eye. These same techniques are currently being used more 
generally in neuroscience. These adaptations sometimes have 
broad cultural importance. For example, optical methods for 
the accurate placement of silicon detectors designed and built 
in the U.S. for LHC experiments were recently adapted to enable 
non-destructive playback of the earliest audio recordings,  
 6Further information can be obtained in the Tools, Techniques, and Technology Connections of Particle Physics report: http://science.energy.gov/hep/news-and-resources/reports/
 7Further information can be obtained in the March 14 , 2014, presentation to HEPAP , Connections of Particle Physics with Other Disciplines, by C. Callan and S. Kachru: 
http://science.energy.gov/hep/hepap/meetings/

=== PAGE 61 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 51
bringing back to life a treasure trove of sounds and voices from 
that pioneering period in the late 19 th century.
Particle physics also provides facilities used by a diverse com-
munity. Environmental scientists use particle beams in climate 
studies, and geoscientists gather valuable data using neutrino 
detectors. In some cases, unlikely connections have been estab-
lished through the construction of particle physics facilities. 
For example, the deployment of photodetectors at a depth of 
2500 m in the ice of the Antarctic for the study of neutrinos 
provided the most clearly-resolved measurements of Antarctic 
dust strata during the last glacial period and are being used to 
reconstruct paleo-climate records in exceptional detail. The 
particle physics community also developed and operates cam-
eras, such as the Dark Energy Camera and the Sloan Digital 
Sky Survey, that serve the broader particle-astrophysics com-
munity. Muon spin spectroscopy, a very sensitive probe for 
condensed matter studies, is made possible through the accel-
erator-based production of muon beams.
Accelerators are critical to many areas beyond their traditional 
role in particle physics and they influence our lives in many 
ways. In recognition of particle physics contributions to tech-
nology, the DOE Office of Science Accelerator R&D Stewardship 
program was recently initiated to serve as a catalyst in transi-
tioning accelerator technologies from particle physics to appli-
cations that will create benefits for science and society at large. 
Modern medicine is a prime beneficiary of particle physics 
research, using accelerators to diagnose and treat patients. 
Proton therapy centers provide increasing access to conformal 
radiation therapy, and ion beam technology is anticipated to 
allow significant advances in patient treatment. In addition, 
research and development investments by particle physics in 
superconducting radio frequency cavities has led to their 
planned use in advanced light sources, enabling a broad spec-
trum of studies in an extensive range of disciplines.
Many of the developments noted above have been informed 
by other science and technology advances, strengthening 
research connections and productivity. Understanding and 
expanding these connections will enable the particle physics 
community to continue to discover innovative experimental 
pathways and create novel detector devices to explore the  
Universe and, if history is a guide, have impacts on society 
beyond our direct science mission.

=== PAGE 62 ===


=== PAGE 63 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 53
Appendices

=== PAGE 64 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 54
Appendix A: 
Charge


=== PAGE 65 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 55


=== PAGE 66 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 56


=== PAGE 67 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 57
Appendix B: 
Panel Members
Steve Ritz, chair
University of California, Santa Cruz
Hiroaki Aihara
University of Tokyo
Martin Breidenbach
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Bob Cousins
University of California, Los Angeles
André de Gouvêa
Northwestern University
Marcel Demarteau
Argonne National Laboratory
Scott Dodelson
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory  
and University of Chicago
Jonathan L. Feng
University of California, Irvine
Bonnie Fleming
Yale University
Fabiola Gianotti
European Organization for Nuclear  
Research (CERN)
Francis Halzen
University of Wisconsin-Madison
JoAnne Hewett
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Wim Leemans
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Joe Lykken
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Dan McKinsey
Yale University
Lia Merminga
TRIUMF
Toshinori Mori
University of Tokyo
Tatsuya Nakada
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology  
in Lausanne (EPFL)
Steve Peggs
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Saul Perlmutter
University of California, Berkeley
Kevin Pitts
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Kate Scholberg
Duke University
Rick van Kooten
Indiana University
Mark Wise
California Institute of Technology
Andy Lankford, ex officio
University of California, Irvine

=== PAGE 68 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 58
Appendix C: 
Process and Meetings
The P5  process had several components, all of which were 
designed with community engagement in mind: 
• A website was maintained, with information, frequent news, 
meetings, and a submissions portal with a public archive.  
http://interactions.org/p5
• There were three large public meetings, whose agendas are 
appended. All talks are posted online.
• There were three physical town halls and three virtual town 
halls. The virtual town halls were particularly effective for hear-
ing younger voices.
• A special effort was made to reach out to younger colleagues, 
with emails to Snowmass Young mailing lists and to PIs urging 
them to inform their students and post-docs about the process, 
and a Twitter feed.
Each of the major activities considered was given a standard 
form to fill in, with cost profiles and FTE estimates for each 
phase of the project (R&D, construction, operations), separated 
by funding agency, along with information about project level 
of maturity, contingency, etc. From these, and agency inputs, 
detailed spreadsheets were developed and used to support 
the budget exercises.
The panel worked by consensus. There were full-panel phone calls 
approximately weekly throughout the process, as well as many 
subgroups to work on tasks in parallel. The panel had additional 
face-to-face meetings on the following dates in 2014: 12–14 
January, 21–24 February, 5–8 April, and 29–30 April. At most meet-
ings, there were sessions without agency personnel in the room. 
There were HEPAP presentations and discussions in September 
2013, December 2013, March 2014, and May 2014. Preliminary 
comments were presented and discussed at the March meeting, 
and the Report was presented, discussed, and approved at the 
May 2014 HEPAP meeting.
The strategic plan and recommendations contained in this 
report, after adoption by HEPAP , are advisory input to the 
Department of Energy and the National Science Foundation. 
The actual design and implementation of any plan in these 
agencies is the responsibility of program management.
The following members of the scientific community served as 
peer reviewers: 
Sally Dawson 
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Persis Drell
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
David Gross
University of California, Santa Barbara
Klaus Honscheid
Ohio State University
Boris Kayser
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Josh Klein
University of Pennsylvania
Dan Marlow
Princeton University
Michael Maloney
National Academy of Sciences
David Schmitz 
University of Chicago
Abe Seiden
University of California, Santa Cruz
Marjorie Shapiro
University of California, Berkeley
 
We thank them very much for their thoughtful comments, which 
were provided on a tight schedule. 
Our report benefited enormously from professional editing 
help by Jim Dawson. AAAS Science & Technology Policy Fellow  
Michael Cooke was very helpful in numerous aspects of press 
and outreach. 
Agency staff and contractors were ever-responsive to logistical 
requests. We especially thank Christie Ashton, Donna Nevels, 
Linda Severs, and Kathy Yarmas. National lab staff also solved 
myriad logistical problems—they made it look easy, and we 
know it was not!

=== PAGE 69 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 59
P5 Workshop on the Future of High 
Energy Physics #1
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Nov. 2–4, 2013
https://indico.fnal.gov/conferenceOtherViews.py?confId=7485
Snowmass inputs and discussion
Energy Frontier
Michael Peskin 
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Intensity Frontier
Hendrik Weerts 
Argonne National Laboratory
Cosmic Frontier
Jonathan Feng 
University of California, Irvine
Capabilities Frontier
William Barletta 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Instrumentation Frontier
Ronald Lipton 
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Computing Frontier
Lothar Bauerdick 
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Education and Outreach
Marjorie Bardeen 
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
International context talks
Accelerator-based Particle Physics Program in Europe
Rolf Heuer 
CERN
Particle Physics Program in Japan
Atsuto Suzuki 
KEK
Strategic Planning for the Particle Physics Program in China
Yifang Wang 
IHEP
Accelerator-based neutrino program
LBNE Science and International Collaboration
Robert Wilson 
Colorado State University
LBNE Beam Planning and Optimization
Vaia Papadimitriou 
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
LBNE Project Cost, Scope, Schedule
James Strait 
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Hyper-K
Masato Shiozawa 
University of Tokyo
Tsuyoshi NAKAYA 
Kyoto University
DAEδALUS and IsoDAR
Mike Shaevitz 
Columbia University
Additional Water Cherenkov
Robert Svoboda 
University of California, Davis
Additional Interim Accelerator-based Neutrino Projects
David Schmitz 
University of Chicago
NuSTORM
Alan Bross 
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Non-accelerator neutrino program
Overview of Future Reactor Experiments
Karsten Heeger 
Yale University
Overview of Future Neutrino Mass and 
Characteristics Experiments
Hamish Robertson 
University of Washington
Town Hall

=== PAGE 70 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 60
P5 Workshop on the Future of High 
Energy Physics #2
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Dec. 2–4, 2013
https://indico.bnl.gov/conferenceDisplay.py?confId=688 
Dark Matter
Dark Matter Overview
Tim Tait 
University of California, Irvine
Direct WIMP Detection
Harry Nelson 
University of California, Santa Barbara
CTA
David Williams 
University of California, Santa Cruz
PINGU
Doug Cowen 
Pennsylvania State University
Theory
Theory Study
Michael Dine 
University of California, Santa Cruz
Computing
Topical Panel on DOE HEP Computing
Salman Habib 
Argonne National Laboratory
Science Connections
Science Connections Panel
Shamit Kachru 
Stanford University
Curt Callen 
Princeton University
Town Hall
International Context: Astroparticle Physics  
Planning in Europe
Particle Astrophysics Planning in Europe
Stavros Katsanevas 
U. Paris VII Denis-Diderot and ApPEC
Cosmic Surveys: Dark Energy and CMB
Particle Physics from Cosmic Surveys:  
Overview of Opportunities
Klaus Honscheid 
Ohio State University
LSST
Bhuv Jain 
University of Pennsylvania 
DESI
Michael Levi 
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
CMB
John Carlstrom 
University of Chicago
HE Cosmic Particles and Additional Topics
Cosmic Particles Overview of Opportunities
Jordan Goodman 
University of Maryland

=== PAGE 71 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 61
P5 Workshop on the Future of High 
Energy Physics #3
Brookhaven National Laboratory, Dec. 15–18, 2013 
https://indico.bnl.gov/conferenceDisplay.py?confId=680
LHC Upgrades
Introduction to HL-LHC
Beate Heinemann 
University of California, Berkeley  
and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Joseph Incandela 
University of California, Santa Barbara
Plans for LHC Accelerator Upgrades
Giorgio Apollinari 
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
CMS/US CMS Detector Upgrade Plans
Jeff Spalding 
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
ATLAS/US ATLAS Detector Upgrade Plans
Hal Evans 
Indiana University
ILC
Overview, Physics and Detectors
Jonathan Bagger 
Johns Hopkins University
ILC the Machine
Mike Harrison 
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Fermilab Proton Accelerator Complex  
and Opportunities Overview
Fermilab Proton Accelerator Complex and Opportunities
Steve Holmes 
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Overview of Physics Opportunities with  
High-intensity Proton Beams
Andreas Kronfeld 
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Proton-driven Rare Process/Precision Experiments
ORKA
Doug Bryman 
University of British Columbia
NNbarX
Yuri Kamyshkov 
University of Tennessee
Muon Campus
Chris Polly 
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
g-2
David Hertzog 
University of Washington
Mu2e
Ron Ray 
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
COMET
Yoshitaka Kuno 
Osaka University
Proton EDM
Yannis Semertzidis 
CAPP/IBS
Young Physicists Forum
HE Vision Machines
Overview of Physics Opportunities  
at Very High Energy Machines
Sally Dawson 
Brookhaven National Laboratory
The Global FCC Effort
Michael Benedikt 
CERN

=== PAGE 72 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 62
Muon Collider and Neutrino Factory
Mark Palmer 
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
CLIC
Steiner Stapnes 
CERN and University of Oslo
Town Hall
Accelerator R&D
Superconducting RF and Normal Conducting RF
Hasan Padamsee 
Cornell University
High-field SC Magnets
David Larbalestier 
Florida State University
High-power Targets
P . Hurh 
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Plasma and Dielectrics
Jean-Pierre Delahaye 
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Instrumentation R&D
Report from the Technology Connections Panel
Marcel Demarteau 
Argonne National Laboratory
Additional Topics
LHCb and Belle II
Hassan Jawahery 
University of Maryland

=== PAGE 73 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 63
How do we understand the Higgs boson? What principle deter-
mines its couplings to quarks and leptons? Why does it con-
dense and acquire a vacuum value throughout the Universe? 
Is there one Higgs particle or many? Is the Higgs particle ele-
mentary or composite?
 
What principle determines the masses and mixings of quarks 
and leptons? Why is the mixing pattern apparently different 
for quarks and leptons? Why is there CP violation in quark 
mixing? Do leptons violate CP?
 
Why are neutrinos so light compared to other matter particles? 
Are neutrinos their own antiparticles? Are their small masses 
connected to the presence of a very high mass scale? Are there 
new interactions that are invisible except through their role 
in neutrino physics?
What mechanism produced the excess of matter over antimatter 
that we see in the Universe? Why are the interactions of par -
ticles and antiparticles not exactly mirror opposites?
 
Dark matter is the dominant component of mass in the Universe. 
What is the dark matter made of? Is it composed of one type 
of new particle or several? What principle determined the cur-
rent density of dark matter in the Universe? Are the dark matter 
particles connected to the particles of the Standard Model, or 
are they part of an entirely new dark sector of particles?
 
What is dark energy? Is it a static energy per unit volume of 
the vacuum, or is it dynamical and evolving with the Universe? 
What principle determines its value?
 
What did the Universe look like in its earliest moments, and 
how did it evolve to contain the structures we observe today? 
The inflationary Universe model requires new fields active in 
the early Universe. Where did these come from, and how can 
we probe them today?
 
Are there additional forces that we have not yet observed? Are 
there additional quantum numbers associated with new fun-
damental symmetries? Are the four known forces unified at 
very short distances? What principles are involved in this 
unification?
 Are there new particles at the TeV energy scale? Such particles 
are motivated by the problem of the Higgs boson, and by ideas 
about space-time symmetry such as supersymmetry and extra 
dimensions. If they exist, how do they acquire mass, and what 
is their mass spectrum? Do they provide new sources of quark 
and lepton mixing and CP violation?
 
Are there new particles that are light and extremely weakly 
interacting? Such particles are motivated by many issues, 
including the strong CP problem, dark matter, dark energy, 
inflation, and attempts to unify the microscopic forces with 
gravity. What experiments can be used to find evidence for 
these particles?
 
Are there extremely massive particles to which we can only 
couple indirectly at currently accessible energies? Examples 
of such particles are seesaw heavy neutrinos or grand unified 
scale particles mediating proton decay. How can we demon-
strate that these particles exist? 
Appendix D: 
Snowmass Questions

=== PAGE 74 ===
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context 64
For convenience, we gather here the full list of recommenda-
tions from the report, with the caveat that some meaning is 
lost when taken out of context. Reference is provided to the 
page in Section 2 upon which each recommendation appears.
Recommendation 1: Pursue the most important opportunities 
wherever they are, and host unique, world-class facilities that 
engage the global scientific community. (p. 8 )
Recommendation 2: Pursue a program to address the five sci-
ence Drivers. (p. 8)
Recommendation 3: Develop a mechanism to reassess the 
project priority at critical decision stages if costs and/or capa-
bilities change substantively. (p. 8)
Recommendation 4: Maintain a program of projects of all 
scales, from the largest international projects to mid- and small-
scale projects. (p. 8)
Recommendation 5: Increase the budget fraction invested in 
construction of projects to the 20%–25% range. (p. 8 )
Recommendation 6: In addition to reaping timely science from 
projects, the research program should provide the flexibility 
to support new ideas and developments. (p. 9 )
Recommendation 7 : Any further reduction in level of effort 
for research should be planned with care, including assessment 
of potential damage in addition to alignment with the P5 vision. 
(p. 9)
Recommendation 8: As with the research program and construc-
tion projects, facility and laboratory operations budgets should 
be evaluated to ensure alignment with the P5 vision. (p. 9)
Recommendation 9: Funding for participation of U.S. particle 
physicists in experiments hosted by other agencies and other 
countries is appropriate and important but should be evaluated 
in the context of the Drivers and the P5  Criteria and should 
not compromise the success of prioritized and approved particle 
physics experiments. (p. 10)
Recommendation 10: Complete the LHC phase-1 upgrades and 
continue the strong collaboration in the LHC with the phase-2 
(HL-LHC) upgrades of the accelerator and both general-purpose 
experiments (ATLAS and CMS). The LHC upgrades constitute 
our highest-priority near-term large project. (p. 10)
Recommendation 11: Motivated by the strong scientific impor-
tance of the ILC and the recent initiative in Japan to host it, 
the U.S. should engage in modest and appropriate levels of ILC 
accelerator and detector design in areas where the U.S. can 
contribute critical expertise. Consider higher levels of collab -
oration if ILC proceeds. (p. 11)
Recommendation 12: In collaboration with international part-
ners, develop a coherent short- and long-baseline neutrino 
program hosted at Fermilab. (p. 11)
Recommendation 13: Form a new international collaboration 
to design and execute a highly capable Long-Baseline Neutrino 
Facility (LBNF) hosted by the U.S. To proceed, a project plan 
and identified resources must exist to meet the minimum 
requirements in the text. LBNF is the highest-priority large 
project in its timeframe. (p. 12)
Recommendation 14: Upgrade the Fermilab proton accelerator 
complex to produce higher intensity beams. R&D for the Proton 
Improvement Plan II (PIP-II) should proceed immediately, fol-
lowed by construction, to provide proton beams of >1  MW by 
the time of first operation of the new long-baseline neutrino 
facility. (p. 12)
Recommendation 15: Select and perform in the short term a 
set of small-scale short-baseline experiments that can conclu-
sively address experimental hints of physics beyond the 
three-neutrino paradigm. Some of these experiments should 
use liquid argon to advance the technology and build the inter-
national community for LBNF at Fermilab. (p. 12)
Recommendation 16: Build DESI as a major step forward in 
dark energy science, if funding permits (see Scenarios discus-
sion below). (p. 13)
Appendix E: 
Full List of Recommendations

=== PAGE 75 ===
Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 65
Recommendation 17: Complete LSST as planned. (p. 14 )
Recommendation 18: Support CMB experiments as part of 
the core particle physics program. The multidisciplinary nature 
of the science warrants continued multiagency support. (p. 14)
Recommendation 19: Proceed immediately with a broad sec-
ond-generation (G2) dark matter direct detection program with 
capabilities described in the text. Invest in this program at a 
level significantly above that called for in the 2012 joint agency 
announcement of opportunity. (p. 14)
Recommendation 20: Support one or more third-generation (G3) 
direct detection experiments, guided by the results of the pre-
ceding searches. Seek a globally complementary program and 
increased international partnership in G3 experiments. (p. 14)
Recommendation 21: Invest in CTA as part of the small projects 
portfolio if the critical NSF Astronomy funding can be obtained. 
(p. 15)
Recommendation 22: Complete the Mu2 e and muon g-2  
projects. (p. 15)
Recommendation 23: Support the discipline of accelerator 
science through advanced accelerator facilities and through 
funding for university programs. Strengthen national labora -
tory-university R&D partnerships, leveraging their diverse 
expertise and facilities. (p. 19 )
Recommendation 24:  Participate in global conceptual design 
studies and critical path R&D for future very high-energy pro-
ton-proton colliders. Continue to play a leadership role in 
superconducting magnet technology focused on the dual goals 
of increasing performance and decreasing costs. (p. 20)
 
Recommendation 25: Reassess the Muon Accelerator Program 
(MAP). Incorporate into the GARD program the MAP activities 
that are of general importance to accelerator R&D, and consult 
with international partners on the early termination of MICE. 
(p. 20)
Recommendation 26: Pursue accelerator R&D with high priority 
at levels consistent with budget constraints. Align the present 
R&D program with the P5 priorities and long-term vision, with 
an appropriate balance among general R&D, directed R&D, and 
accelerator test facilities and among short-, medium-, and long-
term efforts. Focus on outcomes and capabilities that will dra-
matically improve cost effectiveness for mid-term and far-term 
accelerators. (p. 20)
  
Recommendation 27: Focus resources toward directed instru-
mentation R&D in the near-term for high-priority projects. As 
the technical challenges of current high-priority projects are 
met, restore to the extent possible a balanced mix of short-
term and long-term R&D. (p. 20)
  
Recommendation 28: Strengthen university-national laboratory 
partnerships in instrumentation R&D through investment in 
instrumentation at universities. Encourage graduate programs 
with a focus on instrumentation education at HEP supported 
universities and laboratories, and fully exploit the unique capa-
bilities and facilities offered at each. (p. 21 )
Recommendation 29: Strengthen the global cooperation among 
laboratories and universities to address computing and scien-
tific software needs, and provide efficient training in next-gen-
eration hardware and data-science software relevant to particle 
physics. Investigate models for the development and mainte-
nance of major software within and across research areas, 
including long-term data and software preservation. (p. 21 )

=== PAGE 76 ===
Credit
Michael Branigan and his crew at Sandbox Studio, Chicago worked 
swiftly and expertly on the art direction, design and typography. 
Anastasia Kozhevnikova created the beautiful, abstract illustra-
tions for the chapters dividers and science Drivers.

=== PAGE 77 ===
 67
HEPAP P5 Report Transmittal Letter
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA
BERKELEY    DAVIS    IRVINE    LOS ANGELES    MERCED    RIVERSIDE    SAN DIEGO    SAN FRANCISCO                                                            SANTA BARBARA    SANTA CRUZ
DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS AND ASTRONOMY Phone (949) 824-6911  
IRVINE, CALIFORNIA  92697-4575 Fax (949) 824-2174
May 28, 2014
Dr. Patricia M. Dehmer
Acting Director, Office of Science
U.S. Department of Energy
Dr. F. Fleming Crim
Assistant Director
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences
National Science Foundation
Dear Dr. Dehmer and Dr. Crim:
The Report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel, “Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan for 
U.S. Particle Physics in the Global Context”, was presented to HEPAP at its meeting on May 22, 2014. 
This report addresse s your charge “to develop an updated strategic plan for U.S. high energy physics that 
can be executed over a 10 year timescale, in the context of a 20 -year global vision for the field.” At the
meeting, P5 Chair Steve Ritz reviewed the report and its recomme ndations, and responded to questions 
from HEPAP members. 
Following discussion and deliberation, HEPAP unanimously approved the P5 report. HEPAP also separate-
ly approved each of the report’s recommendations.  HEPAP members commended P5 for the success wit h
which, starting with the input of the particle physics community, it developed a strategic plan for the field. 
They also noted the quality of the report in addressing the charge, and expressed their deep appreciation to 
the members of P5 for the enormous effort that subpanel devoted to this process. In conclusion, HEPAP 
voiced its strong endorsement of the strategic plan presented by the P5 report, and support s its immediate 
implementation.
With this letter, on behalf of HEPAP, I respectfully submit for your consideration the final report of P5.
Sincerely yours,
Andrew J. Lankford
Chair, High Energy Physics Advisory Panel
On behalf of the members of HEPAP:
Ursula Bassler
Mary Bishai
Ilan Ben-Zvi
James Buckley
Bruce Carlsten
John Carlstrom
Mirjam Cvetic
Robin Erbacher
Karsten Heeger
Georg Hoffstaetter
Hassan Jawahery
Zoltan Ligeti
Patricia McBride
Hitoshi Murayama
Cecilia Gerber
Murdoch Gilchriese
Tao Han
Leslie Rosenberg
Gabriella Sciolla
Ian Shipsey
Thomas Shutt
Paul Steinhardt
Robert Tschirhart


=== PAGE 78 ===
 68
In promulgating this report to the Department of Energy and 
the National Science Foundation, HEPAP recognizes that there 
are particular recommendations that could affect the interests 
of several organizations and facilities engaged in particle phys-
ics research.  We further recognize that some of the members 
of HEPAP are members of those identified organizations or 
work at those facilities and have interests which could be 
affected by the recommendations that are being forwarded.  
Prior to the review of and voting on this report, and in accor -
dance with advice from the DOE General Counsel’s office, those 
individuals have been identified and recused from participating 
in discussions associated with their home organizations or from 
voting on recommendations associated with those institutions, 
as follows:
For Recommendations 12-15, Prof. Gerber, Dr. McBride, and Dr. 
Tschirhart did not participate in discussions or voting on these 
recommendations;
For Recommendation 16, Dr. Gilchriese and Dr. Ligeti did not 
participate in discussions or voting on this recommendation;
For Recommendation 18, Prof. Carlstrom did not participate in 
discussions or voting on this recommendation;
For Recommendation 19, Dr. Gilchriese, Prof. Rosenberg, and 
Prof. Shutt did not participate in discussions or voting on this 
recommendation;
For Recommendation 21 , Prof. Buckley did not participate in 
discussions or voting on this recommendation;
For Recommendation 22, Prof. Gerber, Dr. McBride, and Dr. 
Tschirhart did not participate in discussions or voting on this 
recommendation;
For Recommendation 25, Dr. Bishai, Dr. Ben-Zvi, Prof. Gerber, 
Dr. McBride, and Dr. Tschirhart did not participate in discussions 
or voting on this recommendation.
Conflict of Interest Resolution During  
HEPAP Approval Process 

=== PAGE 79 ===


=== PAGE 80 ===
Report of the Particle  
Physics Project   
Prioritization Panel (P5)